The Project Gutenberg eBook of Marriage

This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: Marriage

Author: Susan Ferrier

Release date: June 1, 2004 [eBook #12669]
Most recently updated: December 15, 2020

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Carl W. Goss


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MARRIAGE ***




Produced by Carl W. Goss




MARRIAGE

A Novel by Susan Ferrier


"Life consists not of a series of
illustrious actions; the greater part of our time passes in
compliance with necessities--in the performance of daily duties--in
the removal of small inconveniences--in the procurement of petty
pleasures; and we are well or ill at ease, as the main stream of life
glides on smoothly, or is ruffled by small and frequent
interruption."--JOHNSON.


Edinburgh Edition

IN TWO VOLUMES

VOLUME I.


LONDON

RICHARD BENTLEY & SON
Publishers in Ordinary to Her Majesty the Queen

1881


_Printed by_
 R. & R. CLARK, _Edinburgh._




PREFATORY NOTE.

MISS FERRIER'S Novels have, since their first appearance, suffered
curtailment in all subsequent Editions. The present Edition is the
first reprint from the original Editions, and contains the whole of the
omissions in other reprints. It is, therefore, the only perfect Edition
of these Novels.

Works which have received the praise of Sir Walter Scott and Sir James
Mackintosh, and been thought worthy of discussion in the _Noctes
Ambrosianae,_ require no further introduction to the reader. The almost
exceptional position which they occupy as satirizing the foibles rather
than the more serious faults of human nature, and the caustic character
of that satire, mingled with such bright wit and genial humour, give
Miss Ferrier a place to herself in English fiction; and it is felt that
a time has come to recognize this by producing her works in a form which
fits them for the library, and in a type which enables them to be read
with enjoyment.

 G.B.

NEW BURLINGTON STREET,
 _December_ _1881._




MISS FERRIER'S NOVELS. [1]

In November 1854 there died in Edinburgh one who might, with truth, be
called almost the last, if not the last, of that literary galaxy that
adorned Edinburgh society in the days of Scott, Jeffrey, Wilson, and
others. Distinguished by the friendship and confidence of Sir Walter
Scott, the name of Susan Edmonstone Ferrier is one that has become
famous from her three clever, satirical, and most amusing novels of
_Marriage, The Inheritance,_ and _Destiny._ They exhibit, besides, a
keen sense of the ludicrous almost unequalled. She may be said to have
done for Scotland what Jane Austen and Maria Edgeworth have respectively
done for England and Ireland--left portraits, painted in undying
colours, of men and women that will live for ever in the hearts and
minds of her readers. In the present redundant age of novel writers and
novel-readers, and when one would suppose the supply must far exceed
the demand from the amount of puerile and often at the same time
prurient literature in the department of fiction that daily flows from
the press, it is refreshing to turn to the vigorous and, above all,
healthy moral tone of this lady's works. To the present generation they
are as if they had never been, and to the question, "Did you ever read
_Marriage?"_ it is not uncommon in these times to get such an answer
as, "No, never. Who wrote it?" "Miss Ferrier." "I never heard of her or
her novels." It is with the view, therefore, of enlightening such
benighted ones that I pen the following pages.

[1] Reprinted from the _Temple Bar_ Magazine for November 1878,
 Vol I.

Miss Ferrier was the fourth and youngest daughter of James Ferrier,
Writer to the Signet, and was born at Edinburgh, 7th of September 1782.
Her father was bred to that profession in the office of a distant
relative, Mr. Archibald Campbell of Succoth (great grandfather of the
present Archbishop of Canterbury).To his valuable and extensive
business, which included the management of all the Argyll estates, he
ultimately succeeded. He was admitted as a member of the Society of
Writers to the Signet in the year 1770. He was also appointed a
Principal Clerk of Session through the influence (most strenuously
exerted) of his friend and, patron, John, fifth Duke of Argyll, [1] and
was a colleague in that office with Scott. He also numbered among his
friends Henry Mackenzie, the "Man of Feeling," Dr. Hugh Blair, and last,
though not least, Burns the poet. His father, John Ferrier, had been in
the same office till his marriage with Grizzel, only daughter and
heiress of Sir Walter Sandilands Hamilton, Bart., of Westport, county
Linlithgow. [2] John Ferrier was the last Laird of Kirklands, county
Renfrew, subsequently sold to Lord Blantyre. Mr. James Ferrier was the
third son of his parents, and was born 1744. [3] Miss Ferrier was in the
habit of frequently visiting at Inveraray Castle in company with her
father, and while there had ample opportunity afforded her of studying
fashionable life in all its varied and capricious moods, and which have
been preserved to posterity in her admirable delineations of character.
Her reason for becoming an authoress is from her own pen, as follows,
and is entitled a preface to _The Inheritance_:--

[1] To this nobleman, in his later years, Mr. Ferrier devoted much
 of his time, both at Inveraray and Roseneath. He died in 1806.
 His Duchess was the lovely Elizabeth Gunning. Mr. Ferrier died at
 25 George Street, Edinburgh, January 1829, aged eighty-six. Sir
 Walter Scott attended his funeral. After his death Miss Ferrier
 removed to a smaller house, in Nelson Street.

[2] Sir Walter's father, Walter Sandilands of Hilderston, a cadet of
 the Torphichen family (his father was commonly styled Tutor of
 Calder), assumed the name of Hamilton on his marriage with the
 heiress of Westport.

[3] His brothers were: William, who assumed the name of Hamilton on
 succeeding his grandfather in the Westport estate. He was in the
 navy, and at the capture of Quebec, where he assisted the sailors
 to drag the cannon up the heights of Abraham; m. Miss Johnstone
 of Straiton, co. Linlithgow; died 1814. Walter; m. Miss Wallace
 of Cairnhill, co. Ayr, father of the late Colonel Ferrier
 Hamilton of Cairnhill and Westport. Ilay, major-general in the
 army; m. first Miss Macqueen, niece of Lord Braxfield, second,
 Mrs. Cutlar of Orroland, co. Kirkcudbright. He was Governor of
 Dumbarton Castle, and died there 1824.

An introduction had been requested for the first of these three works,
_Marriage;_ but while the author was considering what could be said for
an already thrice-told tale, it had passed through the press with such
rapidity as to outstrip all consideration. Indeed, what can be said for
any of them amounts to so little, it is scarcely worth saying at all.
The first was begun at the urgent desire of a friend, and with the
promise of assistance, which, however, failed long before the end of the
first volume; the work was then thrown aside, and resumed some years
after. [1] It afforded occupation and amusement for idle and solitary
hours, and was published in the belief that the author's name never
would be guessed at, or the work heard of beyond a very limited sphere.
_'Ce n'est que le premier pas qu'il coute'_ in novel-writing, as in
carrying one's head in their hand; _The Inheritance_ and _Destiny _followed
as matters of course. It has been so often and confidently asserted that
almost all the characters are individual portraits, that the author has
little hope of being believed when she asserts the contrary. That some
of them were sketched from life is not denied; nor is it possible for
any writer of fiction to invent situation, or create character, without
recurring to personal observation and experience. But it is a very
different thing to embody recollections, and to make use of them merely
as hints to be wrought out and expanded, as may best suit the purpose
aimed at. It is chiefly in the subordinate characters that anything like
resemblance is to be traced. The individuals who excited the greatest
attention, viz. Lady Juliana Douglas, Mrs. MacShake, and the three
maiden aunts in _Marriage,_ were purely imaginary. The author is the
more anxious to vindicate herself from the charge of personality, as her
works might otherwise appear a very unwarrantable breach of private
confidence. She has been frequently assured that the manners described
in _Marriage_ are now extinct, and that, consequently, the picture must
be already obsolete. But as the same descriptions have been recognized
in families, and acknowledged as faithful delineations by individuals
in various parts of the United Kingdom, it may be inferred that, while
modes and customs fluctuate, the materials of human life are always the
same; and that the subjects of folly and ridicule will continue to exist,
in one form or another, "tant que le même soleil éclairera les mêmes
passions."

[1] It was begun in 1797, finished 1810, published 1818.




MARRIAGE.




CHAPTER I.

"I hate the country, and I hate the town too--and I hate
everything!"--_Private Correspondence._

"BRIGHT shone the sun on the bridal day of Lady Juliana de Valmont. It
was a day of joy, of splendour, of festive magnificence; yet the heart
of the bride was sad! She had given her hand to the man she abhorred;
she had plighted her faith at the altar to one who had bought and sold
her! Yes--sold her for a title! Earl of Courtland was the price for
which the beautiful, the high-born, the accomplished Lady Juliana de
Valmont was bartered by her ambitious father! True, her husband was
rich, noble, and handsome; but what are riches, and rank, and beauty in
a husband, if the heart recoils from the man who possesses them? The
agonized horrors of the bridal night--the tumultuous and distracting
feelings of the succeeding day--who can paint? Not the feeble hand that
ow holds the pen! Suffice it to say, that the wretched victim of
ambition grew every hour more sensible of the misery that awaited her.
Absorbed in the dreadful contemplation of her fate, she preserved a
sullen silence, moving mechanically, and taking no part in the splendid
festivities of which she was the object. At length the moment arrived
when she was to take leave of her father, and forever forsake the scenes
of her youth! Then, and not till then, did a few natural tears find
their way to her eyes. But the emotion was transient; they were hastily
dried, and she suffered herself to be led, without opposition, to the
carriage that was to convey her to her future home."

"Bless me! what a dismal description of a bridal day!" exclaimed Lady
Penelope Penfeather, throwing down a volume of the \_Delicate Distress,\_ as
her sister, Lady Augusta, entered the apartment where she was lounging.
"I hope your bridal day will be a gayer one, Augusta."

Lady Augusta, who was reckoned the sensible sister of the family,
replied with a yawn, "I dare say it will be just like other people's
bridal days--rather disagreeable, I suppose; for I don't expect to have
a choice of my own in marriage, any more than Juliana de Valmont, or
anybody else that ever was married."

"You surely don't expect papa will force you to marry any one you
dislike?" asked Lady Penelope.

"No--I don't expect papa will trouble his head about it. I suppose it
will be settled, as these things always are, by mamma and aunt Pen."

"Well, that is better than having a husband chosen for you by your
father," said Lady Penelope, returning to her book; "for I should think
he must be a horrid creature indeed that mamma and aunt Pen would unite
in approving."

"I am not so sure of that," replied Lady Augusta; "they think very
differently on most subjects; but I can conceive a man--a handsome man,
with a fine air, and fine fortune, and fine title, and--"

"Oh, shocking!" screamed Lady Penelope; "you are not really serious,
Augusta? You cannot be so unnatural as to think of marrying a man you
positively dislike?"

"No, not positively dislike; that might be rather disagreeable; but I
should think it very unnatural to refuse a man whom everybody approved,
merely because I did not happen to be positively in love with him, or
because I thought I could have loved somebody else better."

"In short, you mean to marry for hate, as Juliana de Valmont did for
love," said Lady Penelope, laughing.

"No, I intend to marry for--for--in short, for what everybody marries,"
replied Lady Augusta, impatiently.

"For love, then?"

"No--did you ever know anybody marry for love?"

"Juliana de Valmont did."

"You are always quoting that stupid book," said Lady Augusta, in a
peevish tone; "I wish you would talk of real people. Did you ever know
any man or woman in your own rank marry for love?"

"To be sure I have," replied Lady Penelope, with an air of triumph; "did
not Lady Olivia Sternheim marry Horatio Mandeville? and was not that a
love-match?"

"I don't call that a marriage in our own rank," said Lady Augusta, with
an air of disdain; "Horatio Mandeville was nobody; his father was a
banker, or a merchant, or something horrid; and Lady Olivia was refused
by everybody else before she took him."

"Well, but did not Lord Lindore marry Miss Rivers? and was not that a
love-match?"

"Yes--Lord Lindore married Miss Rivers," said Lady Augusta, slowly; "but
whether it was a love-match or not, I really cannot tell. I know mamma
and aunt Pen were very angry about it; but I suppose it was because
they had intended him for me."

"And don't you think it was a love-match?"

"I don't know--I rather think not; I believe he admired her complexion
very much, and she was charmed with his title. I know she was refused by
Sir Harry Beauville the winter before."

"Well, you will allow that the Duke of L---- married for love?"

"Oh, certainly," cried Lady Augusta, with a sarcastic smile; "there can
be no doubt about that; the object of his choice was so very
attractive! A little crooked woman, with red hair and a lame leg--the
most hideous creature I ever beheld!"

"Hideous! Augusta--you have surely forgot--she had the sweetest
countenance in the world! and though she was crooked, her figure was
reckoned very fine by some people; and then she sung divinely!"

"Yes--she certainly made a great noise, both in singing and talking,"
replied Lady Augusta; "and I believe it was her noise that charmed his
Grace, who is particularly fond of it. But I cannot call that a
love-match."

"What was it, then?"

"I don't know--a fancy, I suppose. He was tired of handsome women, and
so he took a fancy for an ugly one. I know his friends were all
astounded; and mamma said it was a shocking business, and she was truly
sorry for the poor Duke."

"Well, you may say what you please, Augusta, but I am certain the Duke
of L---- married for love; and I hope I shall marry for love too."

"I hope you will, my dear," said Lady Augusta, with a yawn; "and now I
must go and write my letters."

Lady Juliana Lindore was the youngest daughter of the Earl of
Courtland--a Scottish nobleman of high rank, but decayed fortune. He had
married an English heiress, whose large possessions, joined to his own
hereditary estates, might have seemed sufficient to have satisfied even
Scottish pride and English luxury. But the Earl possessed the genius of
dissipation in a supreme degree; and his Countess was not behind him in
her taste for expense. They lived in a style of splendour that eclipsed
all their compeers. Their equipages, their entertainments, their
establishments, were all on the most costly scale; and they contrived,
in a few years, to dissipate a fortune that might have served for
generations.

At the end of fifteen years, the Earl found himself involved in debts to
an immense amount; while his Countess saw her jewels, clothes, and even
furniture seized by the rapacious hands of unrelenting creditors. They
were therefore compelled to relinquish a style of life they could no
longer support, and seek shelter in the shades of retirement. But,
incapable of submitting to the total seclusion which prudence dictated,
they took possession of a villa near Richmond, where they continued to
live in a manner more suited to their former habits than their present
circumstances. It was there that the young Ladies Lindore completed
their education, which had been begun under the first masters in London.
Nothing could be more dissimilar than the characters of the three
sisters. Lady Penelope was esteemed a wit, and, what is very different,
really was one. She had read much, and with discrimination; had seen a
good deal of the world, and had profited by what she had seen. She
possessed a considerable share of penetration, joined to a lively
imagination and a keen sense of the ridiculous. But her wit was
sometimes too severe, and her remarks sometimes too satirical; and if she
had fewer admirers than her sisters, she had, at least, more enemies.

Lady Augusta was the beauty of the family, and, as such, was considered
by her parents as a valuable commodity in the market of the world. She
had been early taught to set a high price upon her charms, and to expect
that they would purchase for her the greatest earthly good--a title and
estate. She had a tolerable understanding, and a considerable share of
that species of knowledge called common sense, which is, perhaps, the
most uncommon of all senses. She was perfectly mistress of all the
various arts of attracting attention and securing admiration; and she
could, with equal ease, assume the enchanting softness of the dove, or
the majestic hauteur of the swan.

Lady Juliana was the youngest, and, in the opinion of many, the most
beautiful of the three. She had the brilliant complexion, the luxuriant
hair, and the fine form, for which her countrywomen are so justly
celebrated. But her beauty was of that species which sometimes fails to
please: it was too dazzling, too commanding; it had too much of the
statue, too little of the woman. Her understanding was good, but
uninformed; her heart was warm, but unregulated; her temper was
violent, but generous. She was the spoiled child of her parents, who,
while they admired her beauty, and were proud of her accomplishments,
yet, by their foolish indulgence, fostered the imperfections of her
nature. She had been accustomed from infancy to have her own way; and,
as she had never been taught to control her passions, she had gradually
acquired a spirit of independence and self-will, which ill fitted her
for the constraints and duties of life.

Such were the three daughters of the Earl of Courtland, who, at the
respective ages of twenty-one, twenty, and nineteen, were introduced
into the fashionable world.




CHAPTER II.

"What's this dull town to me?"

THE Earl and Countess of Courtland were too much engrossed by their own
amusements to bestow much time or attention upon their daughters. They
had got them introduced into the world; they had obtained for them the
\_entrée\_ into the first circles; they had procured for them partners at
balls, chaperons at parties, and lovers at masquerades; and they thought
they had done all that was necessary. But they had omitted the most
important part of a parent's duty--they had failed to instil into their
minds those principles of religion and virtue which could alone have
enabled them to withstand the temptations of the world, or support its
trials.

Lady Penelope found amusement in satirizing the follies and vices which
she despised, but wanted courage to condemn. Lady Augusta was intent
upon achieving a splendid establishment. Lady Juliana, left to the
guidance of her own warm heart and romantic imagination, had early
formed an attachment for a young officer, who possessed no other
recommendation than a handsome person and an elegant address. Captain
Belleville was the younger son of a respectable, but not wealthy, family.
He had entered the army at an early age, and had distinguished himself
by his bravery and good conduct. But he was poor; and the Earl of
Courtland, who valued riches and rank above all other considerations,
peremptorily forbade his daughter to think of him.

Lady Juliana, accustomed to indulgence, and unu...1969 bytes truncated...t Gutenberg™ electronic works
under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund. If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunity to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law. The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.



