The Project Gutenberg eBook of Love and Marriage

This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: Love and Marriage

Author: Ellen Key

Author of introduction, etc.: Havelock Ellis

Translator: Arthur G. Chater

Release date: July 28, 2018 [eBook #57592]

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Turgut Dincer and the Online Distributed
 Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This book was
 produced from images made available by the HathiTrust
 Digital Library.)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LOVE AND MARRIAGE ***




Produced by Turgut Dincer and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This book was
produced from images made available by the HathiTrust
Digital Library.)




Love and Marriage

By

Ellen Key

Author of “The Century of the Child,” etc.


Translated from the Swedish by

Arthur G. Chater


With a Critical and Biographical Introduction by

Havelock Ellis


G. P. Putnam’s Sons
New York and London
The Knickerbocker Press


COPYRIGHT, 1911
BY
G. P. PUTNAM’S SONS

Ninth Printing

The Knickerbocker Press. New York




PUBLISHERS’ NOTE

In this treatise, the veteran Swedish reformer attacks problems the most
vital to the welfare of the human race, problems which have throughout
the centuries engaged the attention of leaders of thought.

The writers who have given attention to the complex subject of the
relations of the sexes, of the obligations of the state in the control
of these relations, and of the organisation of the family as the
foundation of society, include such authors as Plato, Goethe, Richter,
Rousseau, Mary Wollstonecraft, Fourier, Comte, Mrs. Browning, Mill,
Ibsen, Westermarck, Charlotte Gilman, Havelock Ellis, and many others.

These problems are complex, and the difficulties presented by them most
serious. No writer has ever yet presented solutions that could be
accepted as finally satisfactory.

Ellen Key writes with a profound antagonism to the philistinism and
hypocrisy which have characterised much of the consideration given by
the community to the subjects. She points out (as has, of course, been
emphasised by many earlier writers) that the ignoring of an evil does not
dispose of it, and that so far from preserving society from its
influence, the burying of an evil merely tends to increase its corrupting
and demoralising results.

Whether or not the reader be prepared to accept the conclusions and
recommendations of the Swedish thinker, he must recognise that these
conclusions represent the result of painstaking and scholarly thought
and investigation. Daring and iconoclastic as they may be, the views of
Ellen Key are presented with a calmness and philosophy of method that is
absolutely free from any trace of sensationalism.

The book, which is being distributed in half a dozen languages to a
world’s public, must be accepted as a most important contribution to
philosophic thought.

The introduction by Havelock Ellis, himself an authority on social
problems, will help to make clear its purpose and character.

 NEW YORK, January, 1911.




CONTENTS

 PAGE
 INTRODUCTION BY HAVELOCK ELLIS vii

 CHAPTER
 I. THE COURSE OF DEVELOPMENT OF SEXUAL MORALITY 1
 II. THE EVOLUTION OF LOVE 57
 III. LOVE’S FREEDOM 107
 IV. LOVE’S SELECTION 140
 V. THE RIGHT OF MOTHERHOOD 169
 VI. EXEMPTION FROM MOTHERHOOD 200
 VII. COLLECTIVE MOTHERLINESS 246
 VIII. FREE DIVORCE 287
 IX. A NEW MARRIAGE LAW 359




INTRODUCTION

Ellen Key, whose most important book is here for the first time
presented in English, is no stranger in the English-speaking world. Her
_Century of the Child_ has already found many appreciative readers in
America as well as in England.

Ellen Key is descended from a Scotch Highlander, Colonel M’Key (probably
of the famous MacKay clan) who fought under Gustavus Adolphus, and she
attaches no little significance to this ancestry. She has always
interested herself in English matters, and is well acquainted with the
life and literature of Great Britain; but she belongs first and foremost
to Scandinavia. She was born in 1849 in the Swedish province of Smaland,
on a country estate of her father. He had played a distinguished part in
the Swedish parliament as an avowed radical, but his wife was a
representative of an old and noble family. Ellen, their eldest child,
was marked from an early age by her love of nature and of natural
things. This devotion to nature may be considered hereditary, for her
great-grandfather was an ardent disciple of Rousseau, and a special
admirer of Rousseau’s famous treatise on Education. He gave to his son
the name of Émile, which was handed down to Ellen Key’s father. It was
perhaps owing to the Rousseau tradition that the young girl was initiated
from childhood in swimming, rowing, riding, and other exercises then
usually reserved for boys. At the same time, she loved music and
devoured books including Scott’s novels and Shakespeare’s plays. An early
enthusiasm was for Goethe’s _Hermann and Dorothea_; it may be said,
indeed, that the ideal of natural, beautiful, and harmonious living for
which that book stands has never left Ellen Key.

She was educated for the most part at home by German, French, and
Swedish teachers, but it may easily be believed that a girl of so much
individuality of character, so impetuous and so independent, proved a
difficult child to manage and was often misunderstood. One may divine as
much from the sympathetic attitude towards children and the reverence for
their healthy instincts, which are revealed in _The Century of the
Child_. Fortunately young Ellen had a wise and discerning mother, to whom
she owed much; with a fine intuition, this mother overlooked her
daughter’s indifference to domestic vocations and left her free to follow
her own instincts, at the same time exercising a judicious influence over
her development.

While still a young girl, the future author, inspired by Björnson and
other Scandinavian writers, conceived the idea of devoting herself to the
study of the condition of the people and wrote several novels on peasant
life. A remark of her mother’s—that her daughter surely could not be
meant to write novels, because the main questions for her were “the
questions of her own soul”—opened her eyes to the truth that fiction
could not be her vocation. But she was very far from knowing what her
life’s work was to be, and her dreams were of love and motherhood, not
of a career.

With Björnson she was throughout in friendly relationship. He had
recognised her fine abilities before she even began to write, and she on
her side was full of admiration for his genius, strength, and goodness.
The other world-famous writer of Scandinavia Ellen Key learned to know
through his work at the age of eighteen, when her mother presented to her
_Love’s Comedy_, _Brand_, and _Peer Gynt_; this also was an influential
event in her life.

Among writers to whom she was later attracted were Elizabeth B. Browning,
George Eliot, John Stuart Mill, Herbert Spencer, and John Ruskin.

At the age of twenty-three, Ellen Key began those constant excursions to
all the great centres of Europe, which may be said never since to have
ceased, at first in the company of her father, whose secretary,
confidant, and almost co-worker she had become, and she was thus
gradually led to writing for journals. A love of art seems to have been a
primary inspiration of these early journeys, for at this time Ellen Key
was fascinated by the art of painting as she has always been by the
greater art of living, and her wide knowledge of pictures has often
happily illuminated her later writings.

After 1880, when her father lost his fortune, Ellen Key began to teach
in a private school at Stockholm, and two years later she was appointed
lecturer on literature and culture-history at the People’s Institute in
that city. This post she held for nearly twenty years, and it was during
this period that she gradually became known as a writer. She had already
published a few small books, but it was not until 1889 that she issued
her first important work, a study of the famous Swedish woman-novelist,
Anne Charlotte Leffler, Duchess of Cajanello. This was followed by a
series of volumes, mostly collections of essays, dealing with education,
with social questions, with the problems of personality and æsthetics.
_The Century of the Child_ appeared in 1900, and _Love and Marriage_ in
1903. The latter book, which is generally regarded as Ellen Key’s
masterpiece, aroused a storm of controversy in Sweden, and led to much
misunderstanding and misrepresentation. It was followed by _The Woman
Movement_ in 1909.

Ellen Key’s writings are characterised by a profound earnestness, a wide
sympathy, and a fearless sincerity. She writes always from the depths of
her own experience and conviction, and she never hesitates to express
her views, however unconventional they may be. Her style is vigorous and
eloquent, often rising to heights of poetic beauty. She possesses a rare
combination of intellectual power and emotional warmth, of critical
acumen and imaginative insight.

Her central theme is always the same: the supreme importance of love and
freedom in human life. She believes that love is the greatest force in
the world, the source of all that is best and noblest in human nature.
And she believes that freedom is essential for the full development of
love and personality.

In _Love and Marriage_ she applies these principles to the problems of
sex and marriage. She pleads for a new morality, based not on external
compulsion or conventional rules, but on the inner law of love. She
advocates greater freedom in the relations between the sexes, including
the right to motherhood outside marriage and the right to free divorce.
She believes that marriage should be a voluntary union, based on mutual
love and respect, and dissoluble when love ceases.

These views were startling and revolutionary when they were first put
forward, and they still arouse opposition. But they are presented by
Ellen Key with such sincerity, such deep conviction, and such profound
reverence for the sacredness of love, that they command attention and
respect even from those who disagree with them.

Ellen Key is not merely a theorist; she is also a practical reformer. She
has taken an active part in various movements for social and educational
reform in Sweden. She has lectured widely, both in Scandinavia and in
other parts of Europe. She has exercised a profound influence on the
thought of her time, especially among women.

Her message is essentially one of hope and faith in the future of
humanity. She believes that, in spite of all the difficulties and
conflicts of the present, mankind is slowly evolving towards a higher
stage of development, in which love and freedom will prevail.

And she believes that the key to this evolution lies in the hands of
women. It is women, she holds, who are the guardians of love and the
preservers of the race. It is through their influence, their courage,
their devotion to the ideal, that the new era of love and freedom will
be ushered in.

This faith in woman and in the power of love is the keynote of all Ellen
Key’s work. It is this which gives her writings their peculiar force and
appeal. It is this which makes her one of the most significant and
inspiring figures in the world of thought to-day.

HAVELOCK ELLIS.




LOVE AND MARRIAGE




CHAPTER I

THE COURSE OF DEVELOPMENT OF SEXUAL MORALITY

I

In the beginning of the nineteenth century, the Romanticists looked upon
love as the only true ground of marriage. But the Romanticists’ idea of
love was purely spiritual. They regarded the senses as the lower part of
human nature, and believed that true love could only exist when the
spiritual element predominated.

This view was a reaction against the materialism of the eighteenth
century, which had tended to regard love merely as a physical appetite.
But the Romanticists went too far in the opposite direction. They ignored
the physical basis of love, and created an artificial antagonism between
the spirit and the senses.

This dualistic view of human nature has had disastrous consequences for
sexual morality. It has led to hypocrisy, repression, and a false sense
of shame concerning the natural functions of the body.

It has prevented a frank and wholesome understanding of the physical
aspects of love, and has surrounded the whole subject with an atmosphere
of mystery and taboo.

The result has been widespread ignorance, suffering, and maladjustment in
marriage.

II

Towards the middle of the nineteenth century, a new movement began to
make itself felt, both in literature and in life. This was the movement
towards realism and naturalism.

The realists sought to portray life as it is, without idealisation or
sentimentality. They recognised the importance of the physical and
instinctive side of human nature, and refused to ignore the role of the
senses in love.

This movement represented a healthy reaction against the excessive
spiritualism of the Romanticists. But it, too, had its dangers. In its
extreme forms, it tended to swing back towards materialism, reducing
love once more to a mere physical function.

Furthermore, the early realists often dealt with the subject of sex in a
crude and Zolaesque manner, focusing on its pathological and sordid
aspects rather than its beauty and significance.

This provoked a reaction from those who still clung to the idealistic
view, and the conflict between idealism and realism in matters of sex
continued throughout the latter part of the century.

III

Meanwhile, another powerful influence was beginning to shape modern
thought on sexual questions. This was the rise of the scientific spirit,
particularly as applied to biology and psychology.

Darwin’s theory of evolution threw new light on the origins and
development of human instincts, including the sexual instinct.

Psychologists began to study the complex interplay of physical and mental
factors in sexual life, challenging the old dualistic view of mind and
body.

Sociologists like Westermarck investigated the history of marriage and
the family, showing the diversity of sexual customs in different
societies and periods.

Medical science began to pay more attention to the physiological and
pathological aspects of sex, and to the importance of sexual health for
general well-being.

This scientific approach brought a new objectivity and frankness into the
discussion of sexual problems. It helped to dispel ignorance and
prejudice, and laid the foundation for a more rational and enlightened
sexual morality.

IV

Simultaneously with these developments in science and literature, the
woman movement was gathering force.

Women began to demand greater freedom, education, economic independence,
and legal equality.

This movement inevitably raised questions about the traditional roles of
women in marriage and society, and about the existing standards of
sexual morality, which often imposed a stricter code on women than on
men.

Early feminists often tended towards asceticism, viewing sex as a source
of degradation and oppression for women. They emphasised the spiritual
and intellectual aspects of life, and sometimes seemed hostile to the
physical expression of love.

But as the movement developed, a new generation of feminists emerged who
claimed for women not only intellectual and economic freedom, but also
the right to their own sexual life, based on love and mutual respect.

They demanded a single standard of morality for both sexes, and a greater
frankness and honesty in sexual matters.

They recognised the importance of sexual fulfilment for women’s happiness
and development, and challenged the old view that women were naturally
passive or passionless.

V

Out of these complex and often conflicting currents of thought—Romantic
idealism, realism, scientific inquiry, and feminism—a new conception of
sexual morality is gradually emerging.

This new morality seeks to reconcile the spirit and the senses, idealism
and realism. It recognises the physical basis of love, but insists that
it must be integrated with the emotional, intellectual, and spiritual
aspects of human nature.

It values sexual expression not merely as a means of procreation or a
source of physical pleasure, but as a profound form of communication and
communion between two individuals, enriching their personalities and
deepening their bond.

It demands knowledge, frankness, and honesty in sexual matters, rejecting
the old taboos and hypocrisies.

It upholds a single standard of morality for men and women, based on
love, mutual respect, and responsibility.

It recognises the right of the individual to freedom and self-determination
in their personal life, while also emphasising the social responsibilities
that love entails, particularly towards children.

This new morality is still in the process of formation. It faces
opposition from traditionalists who cling to the old ways, and from
extremists who advocate licence rather than freedom.

But it represents, I believe, the direction in which humanity is moving,
towards a higher, freer, and more harmonious relationship between the
sexes.

VI

One of the key concepts in this emerging morality is the idea of
“amoralism” in the sphere of love.

This does not mean immorality or licence. It means that the ultimate
sanction for love lies not in external laws or conventions, but in the
inner quality of the relationship itself.

Love is moral when it enhances life, deepens personality, and creates
happiness and harmony, not only for the individuals concerned, but also
for society.

Love is immoral when it degrades personality, causes suffering, or harms
others.

Marriage, according to this view, does not automatically confer morality
on a sexual relationship. A loveless marriage, maintained for convenience
or convention, may be profoundly immoral in its effects on the partners
and on any children involved.

Conversely, a loving union outside marriage may be ethically superior to
a loveless legal bond.

This does not mean advocating the abolition of marriage. Marriage, as a
publicly recognised and legally protected union, serves important social
functions, particularly in relation to children.

But the emphasis shifts from the external form to the inner reality. The
true marriage is the union of hearts and minds, and the legal ceremony is
merely its outward symbol and social confirmation.

VII

This conception of love as its own justification has profound implications
for our views on sexual freedom.

If love is the supreme value, then individuals should be free to follow
its dictates, provided they do not harm others.

This implies freedom in the choice of a partner, freedom to express love
physically as well as spiritually, and freedom to dissolve a union when
love has died.

Such freedom carries with it great responsibilities. It demands maturity,
self-knowledge, consideration for others, and a deep sense of the
significance of love.

It is not a freedom for the immature, the selfish, or the irresponsible.

But the risks of freedom are ultimately less than the dangers of
repression and hypocrisy.

Only through freedom can individuals learn to love wisely and well. Only
through freedom can a truly ethical relationship between the sexes be
established.

VIII

The development towards this new morality is slow and often painful. It
involves challenging deeply ingrained prejudices, overcoming ignorance
and fear, and experimenting with new forms of relationship.

There will be mistakes, failures, and suffering along the way.

But the goal is worth striving for: a world in which love is honoured
above convention, in which men and women meet as equals in freedom and
mutual respect, and in which the union of the sexes becomes a source of
joy, growth, and creativity for the individual and for the race.

This is the vision which inspires the modern movement for sexual reform.
It is a vision based on faith in life, in love, and in the potential of
human nature to evolve towards higher forms of consciousness and
relationship.




CHAPTER II

THE EVOLUTION OF LOVE

I

Love, in its highest human form, is a complex emotion, woven from many
strands.

At its base lies the primal instinct of sex, the powerful biological urge
which ensures the continuation of the race.

But human love is far more than mere sexual instinct. It involves
emotional, intellectual, and spiritual elements which transform the raw
biological drive into something uniquely human.

II

The evolution of love can be traced through the history of mankind.

In primitive societies, the sexual relationship was often crude and
impersonal, dominated by physical desire and social custom.

Marriage was primarily an economic and social arrangement, concerned with
property, kinship, and the raising of children.

Personal affection and individual choice played a relatively minor role.

III

With the development of civilisation, and particularly with the rise of
romanticism and individualism, the conception of love began to change.

The idea emerged that love should be based on personal affinity,
emotional attraction, and spiritual sympathy, as well as physical desire.

Poets and writers celebrated the ideal of romantic love, portraying it as
the highest and most ennobling human experience.

This ideal gradually influenced social attitudes towards marriage, leading
to a greater emphasis on individual choice and affection as the basis for
union.

IV

However, the evolution of love has been hampered by the persistence of
old attitudes and conventions.

The dualistic view of human nature, separating spirit from senses, led to
a conflict between sacred and profane love.

Physical desire was often regarded as base or sinful, while true love was
seen as purely spiritual.

This created a false dichotomy and prevented the harmonious integration
of all aspects of love.

V

The traditional subordination of women also hindered the development of
true love between the sexes.

When women were regarded as inferior beings, lacking intellectual and
spiritual equality with men, a relationship based on mutual respect,
understanding, and companionship was difficult to achieve.

Love often took the form of male domination and female submission, or of
a chivalrous but condescending idealisation of women.

VI

The modern era is witnessing a further stage in the evolution of love,
driven by the forces of science, feminism, and the ongoing quest for
individual freedom and fulfilment.

Science has helped us to understand the biological and psychological
foundations of love, dispelling old myths and prejudices.

Feminism has asserted the equality of women, demanding their right to
intellectual, economic, and sexual self-determination.

Individualism has emphasised the value of personal experience and the
right of each person to seek happiness and self-realisation in love.

VII

As a result of these influences, a new ideal of love is emerging, which
seeks to integrate all aspects of human nature—physical, emotional,
intellectual, and spiritual.

This new ideal recognises the importance of sexual attraction and
fulfilment, but sees it as part of a larger whole.

It values emotional intimacy, shared interests, intellectual companionship,
and spiritual harmony as equally essential components of love.

It demands equality, mutual respect, and freedom between the partners.

It sees love not as a static state, but as a dynamic process of growth,
mutual enrichment, and shared creativity.

VIII

This higher form of love requires maturity, self-knowledge, and a
willingness to work at the relationship.

It is not merely a matter of falling in love, but of _staying_ in love,
through conscious effort, understanding, and adaptation.

It involves the ability to communicate openly and honestly, to resolve
conflicts constructively, and to support each other’s personal growth.

IX

This evolved form of love has profound implications for marriage.

It demands that marriage be based not merely on social convention or
economic convenience, but on a deep and comprehensive love between the
partners.

It requires that marriage be an equal partnership, in which both husband
and wife have the freedom and opportunity to develop their full potential.

It implies that marriage should be dissoluble when love has irrevocably
died, as the continuation of a loveless union is contrary to the true
spirit of marriage.

X

The evolution of love is far from complete. Humanity is still struggling
to realise this higher ideal in practice.

Ignorance, prejudice, social pressures, and the persistence of old habits
and attitudes continue to create obstacles.

But the direction of evolution is clear: towards a love which is freer,
more equal, more comprehensive, and more deeply rooted in the whole
personality.

XI

This evolution is not merely a matter of changing social norms or laws.
It requires an inner transformation in individuals.

It demands a higher level of consciousness, a greater capacity for
empathy, self-awareness, and responsible freedom.

It requires an education which prepares young people not only for careers,
but also for the art of loving and living together.

XII

The future of marriage, and indeed the future of humanity, depends on
this continued evolution of love.

Only through the development of a higher form of love between the sexes
can we hope to create a society based on harmony, equality, and mutual
respect.

Only through such love can individuals find the deepest fulfilment and
realise their full human potential.




CHAPTER III

LOVE’S FREEDOM

I

Freedom is the essential condition for the growth of love.

Love cannot be commanded, coerced, or bound by external laws.

It arises spontaneously from the depths of the personality, and can only
flourish where there is freedom of choice, freedom of expression, and
freedom to grow.

II

Freedom of choice in love means the right of every individual to choose
their own partner, based on personal affinity and attraction, without
interference from family, society, or the state.

Arranged marriages, or marriages entered into for reasons of wealth,
status, or convenience, violate this fundamental freedom and are inimical
to true love.

III

Freedom of expression in love means the right of the lovers to express
their affection and desire for each other, physically as well as
emotionally and spiritually, without shame or inhibition.

Societal taboos, false modesty, and repressive moral codes which condemn
or restrict the natural expression of love are harmful to the relationship.

True love requires openness, honesty, and the joyous acceptance of the
whole being, including the senses.

IV

Freedom to grow in love means the right of the relationship to evolve and
change over time, and the right of the individuals within it to develop
their personalities.

Love is not static; it is a living, dynamic process.

A relationship which tries to remain fixed and unchanging, or which stifles
the personal growth of the partners, is destined to wither.

True love encourages growth, embraces change, and allows each partner the
space to become more fully themselves.

V

This concept of love’s freedom challenges many traditional views of
marriage.

Traditional marriage often involves restrictions on freedom: the
indissolubility of the bond, the legal subordination of the wife, the
social pressure to conform to conventional roles.

VI

A marriage based on love’s freedom would be different.

It would be a voluntary union, entered into freely by two equal partners.

It would be based on mutual love, respect, and companionship, embracing
all aspects of their beings.

It would allow for the personal growth and independence of both partners.

It would be dissoluble by mutual consent if love irrevocably ceased, as
the continuation of a loveless union is a violation of love’s freedom.

VII

This ideal of free marriage raises complex questions and challenges.

What about responsibility towards children?

What about social stability?

What about the dangers of instability and promiscuity?

VIII

Responsibility towards children is paramount. Love’s freedom does not mean
irresponsibility.

Parents have a profound obligation to provide their children with love,
security, and care, regardless of the state of their own relationship.

Divorce, if it becomes necessary, should be handled in a way which
minimises harm to the children, and ensures their continued well-being
and connection with both parents.

IX

Social stability is important, but it should not be achieved at the cost
of individual happiness and authenticity.

A society based on loveless marriages and repressed individuals is not
truly stable or healthy.

True social stability arises from relationships based on genuine love,
freedom, and mutual respect.

X

The fear of instability and promiscuity is often exaggerated.

Freedom does not necessarily lead to licence. Mature and responsible
individuals do not treat love lightly.

Indeed, the very freedom to choose and to end relationships may encourage
greater seriousness and commitment, as the bond depends on the continued
presence of love, not on external compulsion.

Furthermore, the alternative—forcing people to remain in loveless
unions—often leads to hypocrisy, secret infidelity, and profound
unhappiness, which are arguably more damaging to individuals and society
than open freedom.

XI

Achieving love’s freedom requires more than just changes in laws and
social conventions. It requires an inner transformation.

It demands maturity, self-discipline, honesty, and a deep reverence for
love.

It requires an education which fosters these qualities and prepares
individuals for the responsibilities of freedom.

XII

The path towards love’s freedom is not easy. It involves risks and
challenges.

But it is the path towards a higher and more authentic form of human
relationship.

It is the path towards a future in which love can truly flourish, enriching
the lives of individuals and contributing to a more humane and harmonious
society.




CHAPTER IV

LOVE’S SELECTION

I

The choice of a partner in love is one of the most fateful decisions in
life.

It affects not only the happiness of the individuals concerned, but also
the future of the race, through its influence on heredity and the
upbringing of the next generation.

II

Historically, the choice of a marriage partner has often been determined
by factors other than personal love: family alliances, economic
considerations, social status, religious conformity.

Such external pressures often led to unsuitable unions, lacking in love
and harmony.

III

The modern ideal emphasises individual choice based on personal love and
attraction.

This represents a great advance, as love is the only true foundation for
a fulfilling marriage.

However, falling in love is not always a guarantee of a wise or lasting
choice.

IV

Love is often blind, at least initially. The intense emotion of romantic
love can obscure judgement and idealise the beloved.

People may be attracted to partners who are fundamentally incompatible in
temperament, values, or life goals.

Physical attraction alone, without deeper compatibility, is an insufficient
basis for a lifelong partnership.

V

Therefore, love’s selection needs to be guided by wisdom as well as
passion.

It requires self-knowledge: understanding one’s own needs, values, and
temperament.

It requires knowledge of the other person: looking beyond the initial
glamour to perceive their true character, strengths, and weaknesses.

It requires time: allowing the relationship to develop beyond the first
infatuation, testing its strength and compatibility through shared
experiences.

VI

What are the essential elements of a wise selection in love?

_Mutual Love:_ This is the indispensable foundation. A deep, genuine,
and reciprocal love, embracing all aspects of the personality.

_Physical Attraction:_ A healthy and spontaneous physical attraction is
important for sexual harmony and the vitality of the relationship.

_Temperamental Compatibility:_ While partners need not be identical, a
fundamental compatibility of temperament, energy levels, and emotional
styles is crucial for daily harmony.

_Shared Values and Life Goals:_ Agreement on fundamental values—moral,
spiritual, social—and a shared vision for the future provide a solid
basis for partnership.

_Mutual Respect and Admiration:_ Each partner should genuinely respect
and admire the other’s character, abilities, and aspirations.

_Companionship and Shared Interests:_ The ability to enjoy each other’s
company, to communicate easily, and to share interests and activities
enriches the relationship.

_Emotional Maturity and Stability:_ Both partners should possess a
reasonable degree of emotional maturity, self-awareness, and the ability
to handle conflict constructively.

VII

Society has a role to play in promoting wise selection in love, not
through coercion, but through education and the creation of favourable
conditions.

Education should equip young people with self-knowledge, an understanding
of human relationships, and a realistic view of love and marriage.

Social conditions should allow young men and women ample opportunities to
meet and get to know each other in healthy and natural environments.

Economic independence for women is crucial, so that they are not forced
into marriage for financial security.

VIII

The concept of eugenics, or improving the race through selective
breeding, also enters into the discussion of love’s selection.

While coercive eugenic measures are ethically problematic and often
impractical, a sense of responsibility towards the future generation
should inform the choice of a partner.

Individuals with serious hereditary diseases or defects should consider
the potential consequences before having children.

Love itself often involves an instinctive attraction towards health,
vitality, and desirable qualities, thus acting as a natural eugenic force.

Promoting general health, education, and social conditions which favour
the development of healthy and well-adjusted individuals is the soundest
form of eugenics.

IX

Love’s selection is ultimately a personal and intuitive process, but it
can be enlightened by reason and guided by a sense of responsibility.

It requires balancing the claims of passion with the demands of wisdom,
the needs of the individual with the welfare of the future race.

A choice made with both heart and mind, based on deep love and realistic
understanding, offers the best hope for a lasting and fulfilling union.




CHAPTER V

THE RIGHT OF MOTHERHOOD

I

Motherhood is one of the most profound and significant experiences in a
woman’s life.

It involves not only the physical act of bearing and nurturing a child,
but also a deep emotional and spiritual transformation.

II

Historically, motherhood has been closely tied to marriage. Society has
generally decreed that women should only become mothers within the legal
bonds of matrimony.

Motherhood outside marriage has been stigmatised, and both the unmarried
mother and her child have often faced social ostracism and hardship.

III

This traditional view is being challenged by the modern emphasis on
individual freedom and the recognition of love as the true basis of
sexual relationships.

If love is the supreme justification for union, and if women have the
right to control their own bodies and lives, then the question arises:
Should motherhood be restricted solely to married women?

IV

I believe that every woman who deeply desires motherhood and is prepared
to fulfil its responsibilities has a right to become a mother, whether
she is married or not.

This right derives from her fundamental human right to self-realisation
and the fulfilment of her deepest natural instincts.

To deny a woman motherhood simply because she is unmarried, or because
her relationship does not conform to conventional norms, is an injustice.

V

This assertion of the right of motherhood outside marriage is often met
with strong objections.

It is argued that it undermines the institution of marriage, encourages
immorality, and harms the welfare of the child.

VI

Does it undermine marriage? I believe not. True marriage, based on love,
will always remain the ideal setting for raising children.

Recognising the right of unmarried motherhood does not devalue marriage;
it simply acknowledges that love and the desire for children can exist
outside legal bonds, and that women in such situations should not be
punished or denied their maternal rights.

Indeed, forcing women into loveless marriages simply to legitimise
motherhood is far more damaging to the true spirit of marriage.

VII

Does it encourage immorality? The term “immorality” here usually refers
to sexual relationships outside marriage.

But as argued earlier, the morality of a relationship depends on its inner
quality, not its legal status.

A loving union which leads to desired and cherished motherhood is not
immoral, whether it is legally sanctioned or not.

Furthermore, the right of motherhood is not a plea for casual
promiscuity. It applies to women who enter into motherhood consciously,
responsibly, and out of a deep desire for a child, usually within the
context of a loving relationship, even if that relationship is not
formalised by marriage.

VIII

Does it harm the child? This is the most serious objection.

It is true that children born outside marriage often face social stigma
and may lack the security of a stable two-parent home.

However, these disadvantages are largely the result of society’s punitive
attitude towards illegitimacy, not an inherent consequence of unmarried
motherhood itself.

If society were to abolish the concept of illegitimacy, provide adequate
social and economic support for unmarried mothers and their children, and
judge parenthood by its quality rather than its legal status, these
disadvantages would largely disappear.

Furthermore, a child raised by a loving and capable single mother may be
far better off than a child raised in a loveless or conflict-ridden
marriage.

The crucial factor for a child’s well-being is the presence of love,
security, and responsible care, not the marital status of the parents.

IX

The right of motherhood implies not only the right to bear a child, but
also the right to the necessary social and economic support to raise that
child properly.

Society has a responsibility to ensure that all mothers, married or
unmarried, have the resources and assistance they need to provide for
their children’s welfare.

This includes financial support, healthcare, childcare facilities, and
protection from social discrimination.

X

The father also has responsibilities towards his child, regardless of his
marital status or relationship with the mother.

He has a moral and legal obligation to contribute to the child’s support
and, where possible and desired, to participate in the child’s life.

Recognising the right of unmarried motherhood does not absolve fathers of
their responsibilities.

XI

The assertion of the right of motherhood is part of the broader movement
towards women’s emancipation and the recognition of their full humanity.

It challenges the patriarchal view which subordinates women’s reproductive
capacities to the control of men and the institution of marriage.

It affirms women’s autonomy, their right to choose, and the inherent
dignity of motherhood in whatever context it occurs, provided it is
undertaken responsibly and lovingly.

XII

This right is not absolute. It must be balanced with the welfare of the
child and the responsibilities involved.

Not every woman is suited for motherhood, and not every desire for a
child should necessarily be fulfilled.

But the decision should ultimately rest with the woman herself, based on
her own conscience, capabilities, and circumstances, not on arbitrary
social conventions or legal restrictions.

XIII

The recognition of the right of motherhood, both within and outside
marriage, represents a step towards a more humane, just, and honest
society.

It honours the profound significance of motherhood, respects the autonomy
of women, and prioritises the welfare of children based on the quality of
care they receive, not the legal status of their birth.




CHAPTER VI

EXEMPTION FROM MOTHERHOOD

I

While motherhood is a profound potentiality for most women, it is not a
duty or a necessity for all.

Just as there is a right _to_ motherhood for those who desire it, there
is also a right _to exemption_ from motherhood for those who do not
desire it, or for whom it is unsuitable.

II

Society has often exerted strong pressure on women to marry and bear
children, regarding this as their primary function and destiny.

Women who remained unmarried or childless were often pitied, scorned, or
regarded as failures.

This attitude ignores the diversity of female nature and the variety of
ways in which women can contribute to society and find personal
fulfilment.

III

There are many valid reasons why a woman might choose not to become a
mother.

_Lack of Desire:_ Not all women feel a strong maternal instinct. Some may
have other passions, interests, or vocations which absorb their energies
and provide their primary sense of purpose.

_Unsuitability:_ Some women may recognise, honestly and wisely, that they
do not possess the temperament, patience, or resources required for good
motherhood.

_Health Reasons:_ Poor health, hereditary conditions, or physical
disabilities may make pregnancy or motherhood inadvisable or unduly
burdensome.

_Career or Calling:_ Some women may be deeply committed to a demanding
career, artistic pursuit, or social cause which is incompatible with the
responsibilities of raising children.

_Relationship Factors:_ A woman may be in a loving relationship but choose
not to have children due to the partner’s wishes, financial constraints,
or concerns about the stability of the relationship.

_Personal Choice:_ Ultimately, the decision whether or not to become a
mother is a deeply personal one, and every woman has the right to make
that choice freely, based on her own values, desires, and circumstances.

IV

To force or pressure women into motherhood against their will or better
judgement is a violation of their autonomy and dignity.

Unwanted or resented motherhood is harmful both to the mother and the
child.

The mother may feel trapped, frustrated, or inadequate, unable to give
the child the love and care it needs.

The child may suffer from neglect, emotional deprivation, or the
unconscious resentment of the mother.

V

Society needs to recognise and respect the right of women to choose
exemption from motherhood.

Childless women should not be stigmatised or regarded as incomplete.

Their contributions in other fields—professional, artistic, intellectual,
social—should be valued equally with the contribution of mothers.

VI

This right to exemption from motherhood implies the right to access safe
and reliable methods of birth control.

Women must have the knowledge and the means to control their own fertility,
so that they can choose whether and when to have children.

Compulsory motherhood, resulting from ignorance or lack of access to
contraception, is a form of enslavement.

VII

Respecting the right to exemption from motherhood does not devalue
motherhood itself.

On the contrary, it enhances the dignity of motherhood by ensuring that it
is undertaken freely, consciously, and joyfully by those who truly desire
it and are prepared for its responsibilities.

Motherhood by choice is likely to be better motherhood than motherhood by
compulsion or accident.

VIII

The woman movement has played a crucial role in asserting women’s right
to choose in matters of reproduction.

By demanding education, economic independence, and control over their own
bodies, women have gained greater freedom to shape their own lives,
whether that includes motherhood or not.

IX

It is important to distinguish between choosing exemption from motherhood
and being denied motherhood against one’s will (e.g., through
infertility).

Infertility can be a source of deep sorrow for women who desire children.
Society should offer sympathy and support to those facing this
difficulty, and medical science should continue to seek ways to help them
where possible.

But the existence of involuntary childlessness does not negate the right
of other women to choose voluntary childlessness.

X

In conclusion, the right to exemption from motherhood is as fundamental
as the right to motherhood.

It is based on respect for individual autonomy, the diversity of female
nature, and the recognition that women’s lives and contributions are not
limited solely to reproduction.

A society which honours this right, provides access to birth control, and
values women for their full range of capabilities, is a more just, free,
and enlightened society.




CHAPTER VII

COLLECTIVE MOTHERLINESS

I

While not all women desire or are suited for personal motherhood, the
instinct of motherliness—the capacity for nurturing, care, and
protective love—is a deep-seated trait in female nature.

This motherliness need not be confined solely to the raising of one’s own
biological children.

It can find expression in a wider sphere, embracing the care and welfare
of all children, and indeed, of all vulnerable and developing life.

This is what I call “collective motherliness.”

II

Collective motherliness is the extension of the maternal spirit beyond
the individual family into the community and society as a whole.

It involves a sense of responsibility for the well-being of all children,
regardless of their parentage or social status.

It manifests itself in various forms of social service, education,
healthcare, and reform aimed at improving the lives of children and
creating a better world for them.

III

Women, by virtue of their natural endowment and traditional experience in
nurturing, have a special role to play in cultivating and expressing
collective motherliness.

As women gain greater freedom and participate more fully in public life,
they bring their unique perspectives and capacities to bear on social
problems.

Their influence can help to humanise society, to prioritise the needs of
children and families, and to foster a greater sense of compassion and
care in public policy.

IV

Collective motherliness can be expressed through various channels:

_Education:_ Women as teachers, educators, and shapers of educational
policy can bring a nurturing and child-centred approach to the
development of young minds.

_Healthcare:_ Women as doctors, nurses, and health workers can provide
compassionate care for children and mothers, and advocate for better
public health measures.

_Social Work:_ Women engaged in social work can protect vulnerable
children, support families in need, and work to alleviate poverty and
social injustice.

_Politics and Reform:_ Women participating in politics and social reform
movements can champion laws and policies which promote child welfare,
family support, and social justice.

_Arts and Culture:_ Women artists, writers, and cultural figures can use
their talents to raise awareness, inspire empathy, and promote values of
care and compassion.

V

Collective motherliness is not limited to women who are personally
childless.

Mothers themselves can extend their maternal concern beyond their own
family to the wider community.

Indeed, the experience of personal motherhood can often deepen a woman’s
understanding and empathy for the needs of all children.

VI

Nor is collective motherliness exclusively a female trait.

Men also possess the capacity for nurturing, care, and social
responsibility.

The ideal society requires both collective motherliness and collective
fatherliness—a shared commitment by both sexes to the welfare of the
next generation and the creation of a caring community.

VII

The development of collective motherliness is crucial for social progress.

Many of the gravest problems facing society—poverty, inequality,
violence, environmental destruction—stem from a lack of care, compassion,
and long-term vision.

A stronger infusion of the maternal spirit into public life—emphasising
nurturing, cooperation, and responsibility for the future—is essential
for creating a more humane and sustainable world.

VIII

Education plays a vital role in fostering collective motherliness.

Young people, both boys and girls, should be educated not only in
academic subjects, but also in empathy, social responsibility, and the
art of caring.

They should be encouraged to participate in community service and to
develop a sense of connection with and responsibility for others.

IX

The woman movement, by empowering women and enabling their participation
in public life, is a powerful force for the development of collective
motherliness.

As women bring their voices and values into spheres previously dominated
by men, they can help to shift priorities and create a society more
attuned to human needs and ecological well-being.

X

Collective motherliness represents the socialisation of the maternal
instinct, its transformation from a purely private function into a public
virtue and a force for social change.

It offers a way for all women, whether mothers or not, to express their
nurturing capacities and contribute to the common good.

It holds the promise of a society based more on care, cooperation, and
responsibility, and less on competition, conflict, and exploitation.




CHAPTER VIII

FREE DIVORCE

I

The question of divorce is inextricably linked with the conception of
marriage.

If marriage is regarded as an indissoluble sacrament, ordained by God or
sanctioned by immutable tradition, then divorce is seen as unacceptable
or permissible only in the most extreme circumstances (e.g., adultery).

If, however, marriage is regarded as a human relationship, based on love
and mutual consent, then the possibility of its dissolution when love has
died seems logical and necessary.

II

The traditional view, favouring indissoluble marriage, is often defended
on grounds of religious doctrine, social stability, and the welfare of
children.

It is argued that allowing divorce weakens the sanctity of marriage,
encourages marital breakdown, and harms children by depriving them of a
stable two-parent home.

III

I believe that these arguments, while well-intentioned, are ultimately
flawed.

_Religious Doctrine:_ While some religious traditions oppose divorce,
others permit it under certain conditions. Moreover, in a secularising
society, religious dogma cannot be the sole basis for civil law governing
all citizens.

_Social Stability:_ Forcing unhappy couples to remain legally married does
not create true social stability. It merely masks underlying instability
and creates hypocrisy, resentment, and potentially harmful environments
for children.

_Welfare of Children:_ While divorce can be painful for children, living
in a home filled with conflict, bitterness, or emotional coldness between
parents who no longer love each other can be far more damaging in the
long run.

IV

My advocacy is for “free divorce,” by which I mean divorce based on the
mutual consent of the partners, or even at the request of one partner
after a suitable period of separation, without the need to prove marital
“fault” (such as adultery or cruelty).

The continuation of a marriage should depend on the continued existence
of love and the desire of the partners to remain together, not on legal
compulsion.

When love has irrevocably died, and the partners mutually agree that the
marriage has failed, forcing them to remain legally bound is cruel,
pointless, and contrary to the true spirit of marriage.

V

Objections to free divorce often centre on the fear that it will lead to
instability, hasty decisions, and the abandonment of responsibilities,
especially towards children.

VI

_Instability:_ Experience in countries which have liberalised divorce laws
does not generally support the fear of widespread marital chaos. While
divorce rates may rise initially as existing unhappy marriages are
dissolved, they tend to stabilise.

Furthermore, the possibility of divorce may actually encourage couples to
work harder at their relationship, knowing that the bond depends on
mutual effort and affection, not just legal ties.

_Hasty Decisions:_ Divorce should not be undertaken lightly. Legal
procedures can incorporate safeguards, such as mandatory counselling or
waiting periods, to encourage reflection and reconciliation where
possible.

But ultimately, the decision must rest with the individuals involved. If,
after careful consideration, they conclude that the marriage is beyond
repair, they should have the freedom to end it.

_Responsibilities towards Children:_ Free divorce does not mean freedom
from responsibility towards children.

The law must ensure that adequate financial support, custody arrangements,
and ongoing parental involvement are provided for children following
divorce.

The focus should be on the welfare of the child, regardless of the
parents’ marital status.

VII

The requirement in many traditional divorce laws to prove marital fault
(adultery, cruelty, desertion) is often degrading and hypocritical.

It forces couples to engage in adversarial proceedings, to assign blame,
and sometimes even to fabricate evidence, simply to obtain a legal end to
a marriage which has failed for more complex reasons.

Divorce based on mutual consent or irretrievable breakdown is more honest,
more dignified, and less damaging to the individuals involved and any
children.

VIII

Free divorce is particularly important for women.

Historically, restrictive divorce laws have often trapped women in unhappy
or abusive marriages, especially when they lacked economic independence.

The freedom to end a failed marriage is an essential component of women’s
autonomy and equality.

IX

Free divorce is not an attack on marriage; it is an affirmation of the
true meaning of marriage.

It recognises that marriage should be based on love, and that when love
dies, the justification for the marriage ceases.

It allows individuals the freedom to seek happiness and authentic
relationships, rather than being condemned to lifelong misery in a
loveless union.

X

The transition to free divorce requires careful legal and social
adjustments.

Laws need to be reformed to allow for divorce by mutual consent or on
grounds of irretrievable breakdown.

Procedures should be simplified and made less adversarial.

Adequate provision must be made for the financial support and welfare of
children and, where necessary, of a dependent spouse (though the ideal
is economic independence for both partners).

Social attitudes need to change, moving away from stigmatising divorce
towards offering support and understanding to those whose marriages have
ended.

XI

Free divorce, combined with marriage based on love and equality, offers
the prospect of relationships which are more honest, more fulfilling, and
ultimately more stable because they are founded on genuine connection
rather than external compulsion.

It represents a crucial step in the evolution towards a higher and freer
form of relationship between the sexes.




CHAPTER IX

A NEW MARRIAGE LAW

I

Based on the principles outlined in the preceding chapters—the evolution
of love, love’s freedom, the right of motherhood and exemption from it,
and the need for free divorce—what would a new, more enlightened
marriage law look like?

II

Such a law should aim to support and protect marriage as a loving,
equal, and voluntary partnership, while also providing for its humane
dissolution when it fails.

It should be based on principles of individual freedom, mutual respect,
gender equality, and responsibility, particularly towards children.

III

Key elements of a new marriage law might include:

_1. Marriage as a Civil Contract:_ Marriage should be primarily a civil
contract, entered into freely by two individuals before a state
authority. Religious ceremonies may supplement the civil marriage but
should not be legally required or have precedence.

_2. Equality of Partners:_ The law must recognise the full legal equality
of husband and wife. All remnants of the husband’s traditional authority
or the wife’s subordination should be abolished. Both partners should
have equal rights and responsibilities regarding property, finances,
children, and personal autonomy.

_3. Personal Names:_ Women should have the right to retain their own
surname upon marriage, or choose a joint surname, rather than being
automatically required to adopt the husband’s name.

_4. Property and Finances:_ The law should provide for fair and flexible
arrangements regarding marital property. Options might include separate
property, community property, or pre-nuptial agreements tailored to the
couple’s circumstances. The underlying principle should be partnership
and mutual contribution, recognising the value of unpaid work in the home
as well as paid employment.

_5. Parenthood:_ The law must clearly define the rights and
responsibilities of both parents towards their children, regardless of
marital status. The concept of “illegitimacy” should be abolished. Both
parents should be legally responsible for the child’s financial support,
care, and upbringing.

_6. Birth Control:_ Access to information and means of birth control
should be legally guaranteed, enabling couples to plan their families
responsibly.

_7. Divorce:_ Divorce should be available by mutual consent after a
suitable waiting period, or at the request of one partner after a period
of separation demonstrating irretrievable breakdown. The need to prove
marital “fault” should be eliminated. Divorce proceedings should aim to
be non-adversarial, focusing on fair arrangements for property division,
child custody, and financial support.

_8. Child Custody and Support after Divorce:_ Arrangements for child
custody and support should be based solely on the best interests of the
child. Joint custody and shared parental responsibility should be
encouraged where feasible. Financial support obligations should be
enforced effectively.

_9. Alimony/Spousal Support:_ Alimony should not be automatic but should
be considered based on need, ability to pay, duration of the marriage,
and contributions made during the marriage (including non-financial
contributions). The aim should be to facilitate the transition to
self-sufficiency where possible, rather than creating long-term
dependency.

_10. Recognition of Diverse Relationships:_ While focusing on marriage,
the law might also need to consider ways to provide legal recognition and
protection for other forms of committed relationships (e.g., cohabiting
partners), particularly regarding property and inheritance rights, though
this goes beyond the scope of marriage law itself.

IV

Such a new marriage law would represent a significant departure from many
traditional legal frameworks.

It would align the law more closely with modern ideals of love, equality,
and individual freedom.

It would aim to support healthy, loving marriages while providing a
dignified and humane way to end those which have failed.

V

Implementing such a law requires not only legal reform but also changes
in social attitudes and the provision of supporting services (e.g.,
marriage counselling, mediation services for divorce).

Education is crucial to help individuals understand the principles
underlying the new law and to prepare them for the responsibilities of
marriage and parenthood in this new context.

VI

A new marriage law, based on freedom, equality, and responsibility, is
not a panacea for all marital problems.

But it can create a legal framework which is more conducive to genuine
love, mutual respect, and lasting happiness in the relationship between
the sexes.

It is an essential step in the ongoing evolution towards a higher form of
marriage and a more humane society.




*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LOVE AND MARRIAGE ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works, so
the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States
without permission and without paying copyright royalties. Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect
the PROJECT GUTENBERG™ concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is
a registered trademark, and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks,
unless you receive specific permission. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use
this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works,
reports, performances and research. They may be modified and printed and
given away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with
EBooks not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to
the trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE
THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work (or
any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™ electronic
work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to and accept
all the terms of this license and intellectual property (trademark/copyright)
agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all the terms of this
agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy all copies of
Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your possession. If you paid a
fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project Gutenberg™ electronic
work and you do not agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement,
you may obtain a refund from the person or entity to whom you paid the
fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be used
on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who agree
to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few things that
included in the Project Gutenberg™ collection may be copyrighted even
when the entire work is in the public domain in the United States. For
example, the preface of a work may be protected by copyright while the
underlying work is in the public domain. If there is any doubt about
whether a work is protected by copyright law, talk to a lawyer or check
the copyright status in your country.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States. If an
individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the United States and
there are no copyright marks, notices or other indications of copyright
applied to the work, you may copy and distribute it in the United States
without permission and without paying copyright royalties. Special
rules, set forth below, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works in other countries.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg™ License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is derived
from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not contain a
copyright notice), then you may copy and distribute it in the United
States using trademark attribution, notice and disclaimer provisions
under paragraph 1.E.1 above. If the work is derived from the
U.S. Copyright Office records, the work may be protected by a U.S.
copyright in which case the phrase "Project Gutenberg" must be removed.
Works published in the U.S. between 1929 and 1963 may be protected even
without a copyright notice, if copyright was renewed.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form. Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg™
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works provided
that
- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
 the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
 you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
 to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
 designated The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation as the
 recipient of royalty payments. Your donation to the Project
 Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, Inc. may be tax deductible.
 Follow the instructions posted on the Foundation's website at
 www.gutenberg.org/donate for paying royalties related to Project
 Gutenberg works.

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
 you in writing (or by email) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
 does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™ License.
 You must require such a user to return or destroy all copies of the
 works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue all use of and
 all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™ works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
 money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
 electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
 receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
 distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg™
work or any other work associated with the phrase "Project Gutenberg"
for commercial purposes, you must obtain permission for use of the
trademark "Project Gutenberg" via licensing fees. Licensing fees are
included in paragraph 1.E.8. Other conditions and restrictions may
apply. For additional information about commercial distribution contact
the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address
provided in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, defective or damaged disk or other medium, computer
viruses, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by your
equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund. If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunity to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law. The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.



