The Project Gutenberg eBook of Married Love: A New Contribution to the Solution of Sex Difficulties

This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: Married Love: A New Contribution to the Solution of Sex Difficulties

Author: Marie Carmichael Stopes

Release date: November 30, 2014 [eBook #47501]

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Jonathan Ingram and the Online Distributed
 Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MARRIED LOVE: A NEW CONTRIBUTION TO THE SOLUTION OF SEX DIFFICULTIES ***




Produced by Jonathan Ingram and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Transcriber's note:

Text enclosed by underscores is in italics (_italics_).

Small capital text has been replaced with all capitals.

* * * * *




MARRIED LOVE


Books by the same Author

SCIENTIFIC.

"The Cretaceous Flora, Part I." Illustrated. Published by the
 Trustees of the British Museum. 12s. net.

"The Cretaceous Flora, Part II." Illustrated. Published by the
 Trustees of the British Museum. £1 1s. net.

"Ancient Plants." Illustrated. Published by Blackie. 4s. 6d. net.

"The Study of Plant Life." Illustrated. Published by Blackie. 3s. 6d. net.

"Wise Parenthood." Published by Fifield. 2s. 6d. net.

TRAVEL.

"A Journal from Japan." Published by Blackie. 7s. 6d. net.

LITERARY.

"Man, Other Poems, and a Preface." Published by Heinemann. 3s. 6d. net.

"Conquest," a Three-Act Play. Published by French. 1s. net.

"Gold in the Wood" and "The Race." Two Plays. Published by Fifield. 2s. net.

With Prof. J. Sakurai, "Plays of Old Japan, The Nö." Published by
 Heinemann. 5s. net.

 _The author's vivid and imaginative sympathy has really enabled her in
 some degree to communicate the incommunicable._ ATHENÆUM.




MARRIED LOVE

A New Contribution to the Solution of Sex Difficulties

BY

MARIE CARMICHAEL STOPES

 _Doctor of Science, London; Doctor of Philosophy, Munich; Fellow of
 University College, London; Fellow of the Royal Society of Literature,
 and the Linnean Society, London_

 _With a Preface by Dr. JESSIE MURRAY
 and LETTERS from PROFESSOR E. H. STARLING, F.R.S., and FATHER
 STANISLAUS ST. JOHN, S.J._

 _Sixth and enlarged Edition_


London:
A. C. Fifield
13, Clifford's Inn, E.C.4
1919


 _Dedicated to young husbands and all those who are betrothed in love_


 _First published March 26, 1918_
 _Second Edition printed May 17, 1918_
 _Third Edition printed June 25, 1918_
 _Fourth Edition printed August 2, 1918_
 _Fifth Edition printed September 19, 1918_
 _Sixth Edition printed February 3, 1919_

 _Printed by the Pelican Press, London._

 _Copyright; translation and all other rights reserved by the Author_

 _Copyright in U.S.A._




Contents

 PAGE.

 Preface by Dr. Jessie Murray vii
 Letter from Professor Starling, F.R.S., &c. x
 Author's Preface xi
 Letter from Father St. John and Reply xiv

 Chapter I. The Heart's Desire 1
 Chapter II. The Broken Joy 7
 Chapter III. Woman's "Contrariness" 14
 Chapter IV. The Fundamental Pulse 26
 Chapter V. Mutual Adjustment 38
 Chapter VI. Sleep 55
 Chapter VII. Modesty and Romance 66
 Chapter VIII. Abstinence 72
 Chapter IX. Children 77
 Chapter X. Society 92
 Chapter XI. The Glorious Unfolding 107

 Additions to Sixth Edition 114
 Appendix 123

 Charts to face 32 and 33




Preface

BY Miss JESSIE MURRAY, M.B., B.S.

In this little book Dr. Marie Stopes deals with subjects which are
generally regarded as too sacred for an entirely frank treatment. Some
earnest and delicate minds may feel apprehensive that such frankness in
details is "dangerous," because the effect on prurient minds might be to
give them food for their morbid fancies. It is just such a fear which
has been largely responsible for the silence and mystery which have for
so long been wrapped round the sacred rites of mating.

The question now is, Has this reticence been carried too far? Has it
been carried so far that it now tends to defeat its purpose of
safeguarding public morals? There are many who unhesitatingly answer
such questions in the affirmative. Their intimate knowledge of human
lives compels them to recognise that at least as much harm is done by
silence as by speaking out. Everything depends on how the matter is
presented. Those who are shocked at the publication of such a book as
this on the ground that it gives material for impure minds to sport
with, need only reflect that such material is already amply provided in
certain comic papers, in hosts of inferior novels, too often on the
stage and film, and presented thus in coarse and demoralising guise. It
can do nothing but good to such minds to meet the facts they are already
so familiar with in a totally new light.

On the other hand, there are all the earnest and noble young minds who
seek to know what responsibilities they are taking on themselves when
they marry, and how they may best meet these responsibilities. How few
of them have more than the vaguest ideas on the subject! How few of them
know how or where to obtain the help they desire! They recoil from the
coarse and impure sources of information which are so accessible, and
they hesitate to approach those they have learned to regard as virtuous
and modest, realising that from such they will receive so little actual
information, and that so veiled as to be almost useless.

Dr. Stopes has attempted to meet the need of such seekers, and her book
will certainly be warmly welcomed by them. It is calculated to prevent
many of those mistakes which wreck the happiness of countless lovers as
soon as they are actually married. If it did no more than this it would
be valuable indeed!

But there is an even more important aspect to be considered--the effect
on the child. In all civilised lands there is a growing sense of
responsibility towards the young. The problems of their physical and
mental nurture attract more and more attention day by day. Eugenists,
educationists, physicians, politicians, philanthropists, and even
ordinary parents discuss and ponder, ponder and discuss, matters both
great and small which have a bearing on the development of the child. By
common consent the first seven years of life are regarded as the most
critical. It is during these years that the foundations of the
personality-to-be are laid--"well and truly" or otherwise. It is during
these years that the deepest and most ineradicable impressions are made
in the plastic constitution of the child, arresting or developing this
or the other instinctive trend and fixing it, often for life. And it is
during these years above all that the parents play the most important
role in the inner history of the child's life, not so much by anything
they directly teach through verbal exhortations, warnings, or commands,
as by those subtler influences which are conveyed in gesture, tone, and
facial expression. The younger the child, the more is it influenced
through these more primitive modes of expression, and quite as much when
they are not directed towards itself but are employed by the parents in
their intimate relations with one another in the presence of their
apparently unobserving child--the infant in its cot, the toddling baby
by the hearth, the little child to all appearance absorbed in its
picture book or toy.

Is it not of the utmost importance that these earliest impressions
should be of the finest nature? And should we not therefore welcome all
that may help--as this book can--to make the living cradle of the next
generation as full of beauty and harmony as love and mutual
understanding can?

The age-long conflict between the "lower" and the "higher" impulses,
between the primitive animal nature and the more recently evolved
humanity, is indeed the central fact of man's existence. It is the
subject-matter of all religions, all philosophies, all great dramas and
literature. It is the theme of countless unwritten tragedies in the
lives of men and women. And it is in the intimate relations of the sexes
that this conflict is most acutely felt. The problem is how to reconcile
these warring elements, how to satisfy the deep-seated needs of the
whole being--physical, mental, emotional, spiritual--without hurt to
self or others. It is a problem which confronts every man and woman who
thinks and feels at all. It is a problem which can only be solved by
knowledge--knowledge of self, knowledge of the other sex, knowledge of
the laws which govern human relations.

Dr. Stopes has made a brave attempt to provide some of this necessary
knowledge. Her book is addressed primarily to those about to marry or
recently married, but it contains matter which should be of value to
all who are concerned with the problems of sex and marriage. It is
written in a spirit of reverence for the subject, and with a deep sense
of responsibility. It is frank without being coarse, scientific without
being technical, practical without being materialistic. It is a book
which should help many to find happiness in marriage, and to avoid the
pitfalls which beset the path of the ignorant and the unwary.

 JESSIE MURRAY.

14, Endsleigh Street, W.C.1.




Letter from Professor E. H. Starling, M.D., Sc.D., F.R.C.P., F.R.S.

 University College, London.

 DEAR DR. STOPES,

 I have read your book "Married Love" with the greatest interest. It
 deals with one of the most difficult problems of civilisation, a
 problem which affects the happiness of the individual and the welfare
 of the race. You have dealt with this subject according to the only
 method by which any real advance can be expected, namely, the
 scientific method. By this I mean that you have collected all the
 evidence available, obtained either from your own experience or from
 that of others, and have then built up a theory of the sexual life
 which you present as a guide to others in the ordering of their lives.
 All the aspects of the subject, physical, psychical, and moral, are
 treated with a sincerity and nobility of purpose which must impress
 every reader.

 I can only hope that your book may be widely read, especially by
 medical men, who have unrivalled opportunities for testing the value
 of your views and for carrying on the education of the public in
 these fundamentally important matters.

 Yours very sincerely,

 E. H. STARLING.




Author's Preface

In the following pages I speak to married lovers. I approach my subject
with a deep sense of responsibility. I know that I shall be accused of
shamelessness because I have dared to hold up the lamp of science to
illuminate the sacred precincts of married life. I know that some will
pronounce me an advocate of sensuality because I have pleaded for the
technical knowledge that will help lovers to create and perpetuate their
mutual happiness. I know that others will say I have desecrated the
mysteries of life because I have unveiled them.

But I know also that I speak in all reverence of the beauty and wonder
of love. I know that I speak in all earnestness of the need for
knowledge. I know that I speak in all sincerity of the way to happiness.

I have been impelled to write this book by the poignant suffering which
I have seen resulting from the ignorance which prevails on the subject
of marriage. I have seen young lives wrecked, homes broken up, children
brought into the world undesired and uncared for, all because of the
lack of that knowledge which would have saved them.

I have been urged to write by the countless appeals which have reached
me from men and women in all parts of the world, begging for help in
their difficulties. I have been encouraged to write by the knowledge
that many medical men and women, clergymen, and social workers share my
views and are anxious to see such a book published.

I have written this book for those who are married, or are about to
marry, in the hope that it may help them to attain the highest
happiness. I have written it for those who are parents, or who hope to
be parents, in the belief that it may help them to create a nobler race.
I have written it for those who are teachers, or who are concerned with
the education of the young, in the conviction that it may help them to
guide the rising generation aright.

I have written it in the faith that knowledge is better than ignorance,
that light is better than darkness, that truth is better than falsehood.

I have written it in the hope that it may contribute something towards
the solution of those sex difficulties which cause so much unhappiness
in the world.

I have written it in the certainty that a fuller understanding of the
laws of nature will lead to a happier and healthier life for the
individual and for the race.

I have written it in the reverence which is due to the great mysteries
of life and love.

 MARIE CARMICHAEL STOPES.

Leatherhead, Surrey.




Letter from Father Stanislaus St. John, S.J.

 Farm Street, Berkeley Square, W.1.

 DEAR DR. STOPES,

 I have read your book "Married Love" with great interest and
 admiration. I think it is a most valuable contribution to a subject
 which is of vital importance to the welfare of the individual and the
 race. You have treated a difficult and delicate subject with courage,
 frankness, and reverence.

 I agree with you that ignorance is the cause of much unhappiness in
 married life, and that knowledge is essential for the attainment of
 true happiness. Your book provides the necessary knowledge in a clear
 and scientific manner.

 I am particularly impressed by your insistence on the spiritual aspect
 of marriage. You rightly emphasise the fact that marriage is not
 merely a physical union, but a spiritual partnership, and that true
 happiness can only be found when both aspects are harmoniously
 blended.

 I hope that your book will be widely read, and that it will help many
 to realise the sacredness and beauty of married love.

 Yours sincerely,

 STANISLAUS ST. JOHN, S.J.




Reply to Father St. John

 DEAR FATHER ST. JOHN,

 I thank you most sincerely for your kind and appreciative letter. It
 is a great encouragement to me to know that my book has met with the
 approval of one whose opinion I value so highly.

 I am especially glad that you recognise the spiritual aspect of my
 work. It has been my earnest endeavour to treat the subject not only
 scientifically, but also reverently, and to show that the physical
 union in marriage can and should be the expression of a deep
 spiritual love.

 I share your hope that the book may help many to realise the
 sacredness and beauty of married love, and to attain the happiness
 which is their rightful heritage.

 Yours sincerely,

 MARIE CARMICHAEL STOPES.




CHAPTER I

The Heart's Desire

Every heart desires the Great Beloved. Whether the desired one be human
or divine, the mystical conception of the Beloved is the treasure of the
heart.

In the hidden depths of the consciousness of almost every man and woman
lies the dim knowledge that somewhere is the person who can crown their
life with unimagined understanding and tenderness.

When they meet, the world is transfigured. They are "in love." This
phrase, which is so often used lightly, holds a profound truth. They are
indeed _in_ love; they are bathed in it, surrounded by it, lifted up by
it. They walk on air, they see visions, they dream dreams. The world is
full of beauty, and life is full of joy.

This experience, which comes to most people at some time in their lives,
is the greatest thing in the world. It is the source of all art, all
music, all poetry. It is the inspiration of all noble deeds. It is the
foundation of all true religion.

But alas! this glorious vision too often fades. The lovers marry, and
the dream departs. The transfigured world becomes commonplace again. The
heights are exchanged for the dull levels of everyday life. The joy
gives place to disillusionment, and sometimes even to bitterness.

Why is this? Why does the dream so often vanish with marriage? Why does
the rapture so seldom endure?

Is it because love itself is transient? Is it because the human heart is
fickle? Is it because marriage inevitably kills romance?

I do not believe that any of these is the true reason. I believe that
love can endure, that the heart can be constant, that marriage can
enhance romance.

I believe that the dream fades, not because love dies, but because it is
starved; not because the heart is fickle, but because it is wounded; not
because marriage kills romance, but because the lovers are ignorant of
the laws of love.

They enter upon the most intimate and complex of all human relationships
without knowledge, without guidance, without preparation. They are like
children playing with fire, or like travellers setting out on a long and
difficult journey without a map.

Is it any wonder that they so often lose their way? Is it any wonder
that they so often suffer shipwreck?

The heart desires the Great Beloved. But the heart needs knowledge as
well as love. It needs understanding as well as devotion. It needs
wisdom as well as passion.

It is the purpose of this book to supply some of that knowledge, to
foster that understanding, to impart that wisdom.

It is written in the belief that if lovers understood the laws of their
own beings, and the nature of the bond which unites them, they could
preserve their love in all its beauty and intensity, and find in
marriage not the death of romance, but its glorious unfolding.




CHAPTER II

The Broken Joy

Many couples who truly love each other, and who enter marriage with the
highest ideals and hopes, find their happiness shattered in the first
few weeks or months.

The reasons for this tragedy are often obscure to the sufferers
themselves. They only know that something has gone wrong, that the joy
has departed, that the dream has vanished. They feel bewildered,
disappointed, perhaps resentful.

Sometimes the man blames the woman, sometimes the woman blames the man.
Sometimes they blame marriage itself. But the real cause often lies
deeper than any of these.

It lies in the fundamental ignorance which prevails concerning the
physical laws of love and marriage.

Consider the case of a young couple deeply in love. They marry, full of
joy and expectation. The man, ardent and inexperienced, approaches his
bride with a passion which may be rough and untender through sheer lack
of knowledge. The woman, sensitive and perhaps equally inexperienced,
may be frightened, hurt, or repelled. Her response may be checked, her
joy destroyed.

Or perhaps the man, through mistaken notions of chivalry or consideration,
exercises an undue restraint. He may fear to shock or alarm his bride,
and so fail to awaken her own slumbering passion. She may feel
neglected, unsatisfied, perhaps even doubt his love.

Or again, the couple may be well-matched in temperament and desire, but
ignorant of the natural rhythms of physical love. They may approach the
act of union at times which are physiologically unsuitable, resulting in
disappointment, discomfort, or even pain.

These are but a few examples of the ways in which ignorance can wreck the
happiness of the early days of marriage. The possibilities of misunderstanding
and maladjustment are infinite.

The result is often a sense of disillusionment and failure. The man may
feel that his wife is cold or unresponsive. The woman may feel that her
husband is selfish or inconsiderate. Both may feel that marriage is not
what they expected it to be.

The delicate bloom of romance is rubbed off. The first fine rapture is
lost. The joy is broken.

And this initial failure often has far-reaching consequences. It creates
a barrier of misunderstanding and reserve between the couple. It poisons
their relationship at its very source. It may lead to years of quiet
unhappiness, or even to open conflict and separation.

All this suffering, all this waste of love and happiness, is largely
unnecessary. It is due, not to any inherent defect in marriage or in
human nature, but simply to ignorance.

If young people were properly instructed before marriage, if they
understood the physical and psychological laws which govern their
relationship, they could avoid these pitfalls. They could learn how to
approach each other with tenderness and understanding, how to adjust
their desires and rhythms, how to build up their mutual joy instead of
destroying it.

Knowledge is the key which unlocks the door to lasting happiness in
marriage. Without it, love itself may be powerless to save the joy from
being broken.




CHAPTER III

Woman's "Contrariness"

One of the commonest complaints made by husbands, especially in the
early years of marriage, is that their wives are "contrary."

By this they mean that the wife's desires and moods seem unpredictable
and inconsistent. At one time she may be eager and responsive to his
advances, at another time cold and withdrawn. She may welcome his
embraces one day, and shrink from them the next.

This apparent "contrariness" is often a source of great perplexity and
distress to the husband. He cannot understand it. He may attribute it to
caprice, to ill-temper, or even to lack of love.

He may feel hurt, baffled, resentful. He may try to overcome her
reluctance by insistence, or he may withdraw into wounded silence. In
either case, a barrier of misunderstanding grows up between them.

The truth is that this so-called "contrariness" is not, as a rule, due
to any fault in the woman's character or affection. It is the natural
result of physiological laws which are too often ignored or misunderstood.

Woman's nature is fundamentally rhythmic. Her whole being, physical,
mental, and emotional, is subject to a recurring cycle of change.

This cycle is most obviously manifested in the monthly periodicity of
menstruation. But this is only one phase of a deeper and more complex
rhythm which affects her whole life.

There are times in this cycle when the woman's vitality is high, her
spirits are buoyant, her emotions are warm and expansive. At such times,
her desire for love and union is naturally strong. She welcomes her
husband's advances, and responds to them with joy.

There are other times when her vitality is lower, her spirits are
depressed, her emotions are withdrawn and sensitive. At such times, her
desire for physical union may be absent, or even replaced by a feeling
of aversion. She needs rest, quiet, and understanding tenderness, rather
than passionate demands.

If the husband is ignorant of this fundamental rhythm, he cannot
understand his wife's changing moods. He may make his advances at times
when she is physiologically unprepared and emotionally unreceptive.

Her natural reluctance, which is simply a sign that her body and mind
need rest, appears to him as "contrariness." He feels repulsed and
misunderstood.

She, on her part, feels that his demands are inconsiderate and untimely.
She may try to yield out of a sense of duty, but the effort is painful
and unnatural. Or she may resist, and feel guilty or misunderstood
herself.

Thus, through sheer ignorance of a natural law, a state of friction and
misunderstanding is created, which may poison the whole relationship.

The husband thinks his wife is capricious; the wife thinks her husband is
selfish.

If, however, the husband understands the rhythmic nature of his wife's
being, he can adapt himself to it. He can learn to recognise the times
when she is naturally ardent and responsive, and the times when she
needs rest and tenderness.

He can make his advances with wisdom and consideration, choosing the
moments when they are most likely to be welcomed.

He can learn to respect her need for periodic withdrawal, and to offer
her sympathy and understanding instead of demanding a response she cannot
give.

Such understanding and adaptation on the part of the husband will transform
the situation. The wife's apparent "contrariness" will disappear, because
it was never really contrariness at all, but simply the natural ebb and
flow of her being.

She will feel understood and cherished. Her love and trust will deepen.
The harmony between them will be restored and strengthened.

Knowledge of the woman's natural rhythm is therefore essential for the
husband who desires lasting happiness in marriage. It is the key to
understanding her moods, to respecting her needs, and to building up a
mutual joy based on harmony and mutual adjustment.




CHAPTER IV

The Fundamental Pulse

We have seen that woman's nature is rhythmic, subject to a recurring
cycle of ebb and flow. But man's nature also has its rhythms, though
they are generally less marked and less regular than those of woman.

There is a fundamental pulse in the life of both sexes, a tide of energy
which rises and falls, affecting their physical vitality, their mental
outlook, and their emotional desires.

In woman, as we have observed, this pulse is closely linked with the
monthly reproductive cycle. There is typically a period of heightened
vitality and desire leading up to ovulation, followed by a period of
lower energy and potential withdrawal as menstruation approaches.

In man, the rhythm is generally less defined and more variable. It may be
influenced by factors such as health, work, stress, and general
well-being. But most men experience periods of greater and lesser sexual
energy and desire.

There are times when the man feels strong, ardent, and eager for union.
There are other times when he feels tired, indifferent, or preoccupied.

True harmony in marriage requires a mutual understanding and adjustment
of these differing rhythms.

If the partners are ignorant of their own and each other's natural
pulses, they are likely to clash.

The man may make demands when the woman is unreceptive, or the woman may
desire closeness when the man is withdrawn.

This lack of synchronicity can lead to frustration, disappointment, and
misunderstanding on both sides.

But if the couple understand the nature of these fundamental rhythms, they
can learn to adapt to them.

They can learn to recognise the signs of rising and falling energy in
themselves and in each other.

They can learn to choose the times for union when both are physiologically
and emotionally attuned.

This does not mean that they must always wait for perfect synchronicity.
Love and tenderness can often bridge the gap between differing moods and
desires.

But it does mean that they should be aware of the underlying rhythms and
respect them.

They should avoid making demands when the partner is clearly tired,
stressed, or unreceptive.

They should cultivate patience, tenderness, and mutual consideration.

Furthermore, it is important to recognise that the rhythm of desire is
not always the same in the two sexes even when both are willing.

Generally speaking, the man's desire is more quickly aroused and more
directly focused on the physical act.

The woman's desire is often slower to awaken, more diffused, and more
dependent on emotional and romantic preliminaries.

Ignorance of this difference can lead to difficulties.

The man, in his eagerness, may rush towards consummation without giving
the woman sufficient time to become fully aroused.

She may feel that the act is hurried, incomplete, or lacking in tenderness.
She may not reach the climax of satisfaction, and may be left feeling
frustrated or resentful.

The man, unaware of her slower rhythm, may feel satisfied himself, and
fail to understand her lack of response or subsequent coolness.

Here again, knowledge and understanding are essential.

The man needs to learn the art of wooing, the importance of tenderness,
patience, and prolonged foreplay in awakening the woman's full response.

He needs to understand that her satisfaction may depend on a slower,
more leisured approach to the act of union.

The woman, on her part, needs to understand the man's more direct
ardour, and to help him learn how best to arouse and satisfy her.

Openness and loving communication are vital here. The couple need to be
able to talk freely and tenderly about their desires, their needs, and
their responses.

By understanding and respecting the fundamental pulse of life in both its
cyclical and its differing sexual manifestations, the married lovers can
achieve a deep and lasting harmony.

They can learn to time their union wisely, to approach each other with
tenderness and skill, and to build up a mutual joy which grows richer
and deeper with the passing years.

[Illustration: Chart I]

[Illustration: Chart II]

_Explanation of the Charts._

These charts are intended to represent diagrammatically the conception
of the fundamental rhythm or law of periodicity in the vital energies
and sex-impulses of men and women, as explained in Chapters III and IV.

Chart I represents the typical monthly cycle in woman. The curve rises
from a low point during or just after menstruation (M) to a peak of
vitality and desire around the time of ovulation (O), about midway
between the periods. It then gradually falls towards the next
menstrual period.

This represents the underlying physiological tide. Superimposed on this
may be smaller waves or fluctuations due to external circumstances,
emotions, or the influence of the partner.

The periods marked by diagonal shading represent the times when desire
is naturally strongest and response most likely to be full and joyous.
The periods marked by horizontal shading represent the times when
vitality is lower and the need for rest and tenderness may be greater.

Chart II represents a possible rhythm in man over a similar period. The
curve is shown as less regular and less pronounced than in woman, with
peaks of desire occurring perhaps more frequently but less predictably.
The shaded areas indicate periods of potentially higher ardour.

It must be emphasised that these charts are purely diagrammatic and
illustrative. Individual rhythms vary greatly. The purpose is simply to
visualise the concept of natural periodicity, which needs to be
understood and respected for harmonious adjustment in marriage.




CHAPTER V

Mutual Adjustment

Harmony in marriage does not come about by chance. It has to be created
by conscious effort, mutual understanding, and loving adjustment.

Nowhere is this more true than in the physical relationship.

We have seen that men and women differ in their natural rhythms and in
their modes of response. These differences, if not understood and
allowed for, can lead to friction and unhappiness. But if they are
recognised and wisely handled, they can become a source of deeper
interest and mutual enrichment.

The art of love lies in the skilful and tender adjustment of these
differences.

It requires, first of all, knowledge--knowledge of oneself, knowledge of
the partner, knowledge of the general laws of sex.

It requires, secondly, patience--patience to learn, patience to adapt,
patience to wait for the right moment and the right mood.

It requires, thirdly, tenderness--a constant consideration for the
partner's feelings, needs, and desires.

It requires, fourthly, skill--the skill which comes from knowledge,
practice, and loving attention to detail.

Let us consider some practical aspects of this mutual adjustment.

_Timing._ As we have seen, the choice of the right time for union is of
great importance. By observing and respecting each other's natural
rhythms, the couple can avoid untimely demands and enhance the joy of
mutual response.

This requires communication and understanding. The partners should feel
free to express their desires or their need for rest without fear of
hurting or offending each other.

A husband who truly loves his wife will not wish to force his attentions
upon her when she is tired or unwilling. A wife who truly loves her
husband will not wish to deny him unreasonably when he is ardent and she
is capable of response.

Mutual consideration and loving compromise are the keynotes here.

_Preliminaries._ The art of love includes the art of wooing. The man
needs to understand the importance of tender and romantic preliminaries
in awakening the woman's desire.

Words of love, caresses, kisses, gentle and prolonged stimulation--all
these play a vital part in preparing the woman for union and ensuring
her full satisfaction.

A hurried or purely physical approach may leave her cold and unresponsive,
even if she consents to the act.

The man who takes time and care to woo his wife, to arouse her passion
gently and skilfully, will be rewarded by a far deeper and more joyous
response.

_The Act Itself._ During the act of union, mutual adjustment is again
essential.

The man needs to control his own eagerness, to moderate his pace, and to
focus his attention on his partner's response.

His aim should be not merely his own satisfaction, but the mutual joy and
climax of both.

He needs to learn the techniques which help to prolong the act and to
intensify the woman's pleasure, so that they may reach the culmination
together.

The woman, on her part, needs to be free and uninhibited in her
response. She should not be afraid to guide her husband by word or sign,
to show him what pleases her, to participate actively and joyously in
their mutual embrace.

False modesty or passive submission can rob the act of its full beauty
and satisfaction for both partners.

_Aftermath._ The moments following the climax are also important. Too
often, the man turns away immediately and falls asleep, leaving the woman
feeling lonely or unsatisfied.

The aftermath of union should be a time of quiet tenderness, of shared
contentment, of loving words and caresses.

This period of closeness helps to deepen the emotional bond and to round
off the experience with a sense of perfect fulfilment.

_Variety._ While rhythm and mutual adjustment are essential, love also
needs variety to keep it fresh and alive.

Too much routine, even in the expression of love, can lead to boredom.

The couple should not be afraid to introduce variety into their love-making
--variety in time, in place, in mood, in technique.

Spontaneity, playfulness, imagination--all have their part in keeping
the flame of romance burning brightly.

_Communication._ Underlying all these aspects of mutual adjustment is the
need for open and honest communication.

The partners must be able to talk freely and lovingly about their
physical relationship, their desires, their difficulties, their joys.

Silence and reserve in these matters can lead to misunderstandings and
unhappiness which could easily be resolved by frank discussion.

Such communication requires trust, tenderness, and a willingness to
listen as well as to speak.

It is not always easy, especially at first, but it is essential for the
building of a truly harmonious and satisfying physical relationship.

Mutual adjustment in marriage is an art which requires lifelong learning
and practice. It is based on knowledge, patience, tenderness, skill, and
loving communication.

But the rewards are immeasurable. For those who master this art, the
physical union becomes not merely a source of pleasure, but a profound
expression of their love, a means of deepening their intimacy, and a
foundation for lasting happiness.




CHAPTER VI

Sleep

The question of sleeping arrangements in marriage is one which deserves
more attention than it usually receives.

Custom and convention often dictate that the married couple should share
the same bed, and even the same room, throughout their lives together.

But is this custom always conducive to health, harmony, and happiness?

There are strong arguments, both physiological and psychological, in
favour of separate sleeping arrangements, at least for part of the time.

_Physiological Considerations._

Sleep is essential for health and well-being. It is the time when the
body repairs itself, energy is restored, and the nervous system finds
rest.

Anything which interferes with sound and refreshing sleep is detrimental
to health.

Sharing a bed can often lead to disturbed sleep for one or both partners.
Differences in temperature preferences, restlessness, snoring, differing
hours of retiring and rising--all these can interfere with the quality
of sleep.

One partner may be kept awake or repeatedly disturbed by the movements or
noises of the other.

Over a long period, this chronic lack of restful sleep can have a serious
effect on health, leading to fatigue, irritability, and nervous strain.

Furthermore, the constant close proximity throughout the night may not be
ideal from a purely hygienic point of view. The air in a shared bedroom,
especially if small or poorly ventilated, can become vitiated.

Separate beds, or preferably separate rooms, allow each partner to sleep
undisturbed in a fresh and healthy atmosphere, according to their own
needs and habits.

This can lead to improved health, better temper, and increased vitality
for both.

_Psychological Considerations._

While closeness and intimacy are essential in marriage, constant and
unbroken proximity can sometimes blunt the edge of romance and desire.

"Familiarity breeds contempt" is too strong a phrase, but it holds a
grain of truth. A little distance, a little privacy, can often enhance
the charm and mystery which are part of love.

Sharing the same room and bed night after night, year after year, can
lead to a certain staleness, a lack of glamour, a taking-for-granted
which may subtly undermine the romantic element in the relationship.

The little personal details of toilet and sleep, which might be
overlooked or even found endearing in the first flush of love, can
sometimes become sources of minor irritation or disillusionment over
time.

Separate rooms, on the other hand, allow each partner to retain a degree
of personal privacy and independence. They can retire and rise at their
own hours, read or pursue quiet occupations without disturbing the
other.

This element of separateness can actually enhance the joy of coming
together. The deliberate choice to seek each other's company for intimacy
and love-making becomes more conscious, more romantic, than the mere
automatic proximity of sharing the same bed.

The visits to each other's rooms can retain an element of courtship, of
special occasion, which may be lost in the routine of constant
cohabitation.

It preserves a certain freshness and excitement in the relationship.

_Practical Arrangements._

Ideally, therefore, the married couple should have the option of separate
bedrooms.

This does not mean that they should always sleep apart. There will be
times when the desire for closeness and companionship throughout the
night is strong, and they will naturally choose to share a room or bed.

But they should also have the freedom to sleep separately when they feel
the need for undisturbed rest, privacy, or simply a change.

The arrangement should be flexible, based on mutual understanding and
agreement, not on rigid custom or convention.

If separate rooms are not possible due to lack of space, then separate
beds within the same room are the next best alternative.

This at least allows for greater comfort, hygiene, and freedom from
disturbance than sharing the same bed.

_Objections Considered._

Some may object that separate sleeping arrangements imply a lack of love
or intimacy.

This is a misunderstanding. True intimacy is based on mutual respect,
understanding, and the conscious choice to be together, not on mere
physical proximity enforced by custom.

Love can often be strengthened, not weakened, by respecting each other's
need for privacy and rest.

Others may fear that separate rooms will lead to a decrease in sexual
intercourse.

This is unlikely if the love between the couple is genuine. The desire
for union will lead them to seek each other out, and the act itself may
gain in significance and romance precisely because it involves a
conscious choice and a deliberate coming together.

It may even help to regulate intercourse more wisely, avoiding the
excesses or the routine which can sometimes result from the constant
opportunity presented by sharing the same bed.

In conclusion, the question of sleeping arrangements should be approached
with common sense and a primary regard for health, comfort, and the
preservation of romance.

While shared intimacy is precious, the custom of invariably sharing the
same bed or room is not necessarily the best way to achieve lasting
happiness.

Flexibility, mutual consideration, and the option of privacy and
undisturbed rest offered by separate beds or rooms can contribute
significantly to the physical and psychological well-being of both
partners, and thus to the enduring harmony of their marriage.




CHAPTER VII

Modesty and Romance

Modesty is a natural and beautiful attribute, especially in woman. But
like many other virtues, it can be misunderstood or carried to excess,
with harmful results in marriage.

True modesty is an innate sense of privacy and reserve concerning the
intimate functions of the body and the sacred experiences of love. It is
based on self-respect and reverence for life.

False modesty, on the other hand, is often the result of faulty
education, fear, or ignorance. It involves a sense of shame or disgust
concerning natural bodily functions and the physical expression of love.

This false modesty can be a serious barrier to happiness in marriage.

It may prevent the woman from responding freely and joyously to her
husband's love-making. She may feel inhibited, ashamed, or guilty about
her own desires and sensations.

She may be reluctant to communicate her needs or preferences to her
husband, leaving him ignorant of how best to please her.

She may shrink from the necessary physical intimacy, or endure it with a
sense of passive submission rather than active participation.

This lack of freedom and responsiveness can be deeply disappointing and
frustrating to the husband. He may feel that his wife does not truly
love him, or that she is cold and passionless.

It can also be damaging to the woman herself, preventing her from
experiencing the full joy and satisfaction of physical union, and leading
to nervous tension or emotional starvation.

False modesty can also interfere with the necessary practical aspects of
married life, such as personal hygiene, discussion of health matters, or
preparation for childbirth.

It is essential, therefore, to distinguish between true modesty, which is
wholesome and desirable, and false modesty, which is harmful and
should be overcome.

True modesty does not preclude frankness and openness between husband and
wife in the privacy of their relationship. It does not forbid the joyous
and uninhibited expression of mutual love.

It is compatible with a full understanding and acceptance of the physical
aspects of marriage, approached with reverence and tenderness.

How can false modesty be overcome?

Firstly, through education. Young people should be taught, wisely and
reverently, the facts of life and the nature of love and marriage. They
should learn to regard their bodies and their natural functions without
shame or disgust.

Secondly, through the attitude of the husband. If the husband approaches
his wife with tenderness, patience, and reverence, he can help her to
overcome her fears and inhibitions.

He should never be rough, hasty, or inconsiderate. He should seek to woo
her mind and emotions as well as her body.

He should encourage her to express her feelings and desires freely, and
show her that her response is welcomed and cherished.

Thirdly, through conscious effort on the part of the woman herself. If
she recognises that her modesty is excessive or based on false ideas,
she can strive to overcome it.

She can cultivate a healthier attitude towards her own body and the
physical expression of love. She can learn to communicate her needs to
her husband, and to participate actively and joyously in their union.

This may require courage and effort, especially at first, but the reward
in terms of increased happiness and deeper intimacy is immeasurable.

Romance in marriage depends greatly on the preservation of a certain
element of mystery, glamour, and idealism.

While frankness and intimacy are essential, too much crude realism or
lack of personal refinement can destroy the delicate bloom of romance.

True modesty helps to preserve this bloom. It involves a respect for
personal privacy, a care for personal appearance, a certain delicacy and
reserve even in the midst of intimacy.

The husband who respects his wife's modesty, who treats her always with
chivalry and tenderness, who avoids coarseness in word or deed, helps to
keep romance alive.

The wife who retains her personal refinement, who takes care of her
appearance, who preserves an element of mystery and allure, also
contributes to the enduring romance of their relationship.

Modesty and romance are closely linked. True modesty, based on
self-respect and reverence, enhances romance. False modesty, based on
fear and ignorance, destroys both romance and happiness.

By understanding this distinction, and by cultivating true modesty while
overcoming false shame, married lovers can preserve the beauty and
glory of their love throughout their lives together.




CHAPTER VIII

Abstinence

The question of abstinence from sexual intercourse within marriage is one
which often causes difficulty and misunderstanding.

There are various reasons why periods of abstinence may be necessary or
desirable.

_Physiological Reasons._

As we have seen, the woman's natural rhythm involves periods when she may
not desire union, or when intercourse might be uncomfortable or even
harmful (e.g., during menstruation, certain stages of pregnancy, or
after childbirth).

Illness or fatigue in either partner may also necessitate temporary
abstinence.

Respect for these physiological needs is essential for health and harmony.
Forcing intercourse at such times is inconsiderate and potentially
damaging.

_Psychological and Spiritual Reasons._

Apart from purely physical reasons, there may be times when one or both
partners feel the need for a period of abstinence for psychological or
spiritual reasons.

Intense preoccupation with work, creative activity, or spiritual
pursuits may temporarily divert energy away from the physical plane.

Emotional stress, grief, or conflict may make intimacy inappropriate or
undesired.

Some couples may feel that occasional periods of abstinence help to
renew desire, enhance appreciation, or deepen the spiritual aspect of
their relationship.

_Contraceptive Reasons._

In the absence of reliable and acceptable methods of birth control,
abstinence may be practised as the only means of limiting the family.

This, however, is often a source of great strain and unhappiness. Enforced
and prolonged abstinence, when desire is present, can lead to nervous
tension, irritability, resentment, and marital discord.

It is an unnatural and unsatisfactory solution to the problem of family
limitation.

_Mutual Understanding and Agreement._

Whatever the reason for abstinence, the crucial factor is mutual
understanding and agreement between the partners.

Abstinence which is imposed by one partner upon the other against their
will or without understanding is likely to cause suffering and conflict.

The partner who desires union may feel rejected, unloved, or frustrated.
The partner who imposes abstinence may feel guilty, misunderstood, or
resentful of the other's demands.

Open and honest communication is vital. The reasons for desiring
abstinence should be explained lovingly and considerately.

The needs and feelings of both partners should be taken into account.

A mutually acceptable agreement should be reached, based on love,
respect, and compromise.

_The Dangers of Excessive Abstinence._

While temporary and mutually agreed abstinence can be harmless or even
beneficial, prolonged or enforced abstinence within marriage can be
detrimental.

It can lead to physical and nervous strain, especially for the man, whose
sexual energy may require more regular release.

It can create emotional distance and resentment between the partners.

It may even, in some cases, lead to infidelity, as the frustrated partner
seeks satisfaction elsewhere.

Therefore, abstinence should not be practised lightly or for unduly long
periods, unless there are compelling reasons which are fully understood
and accepted by both partners.

_The Importance of Tenderness._

During periods of abstinence, it is especially important to maintain
tenderness and affection in other ways.

Loving words, caresses, companionship, and mutual support can help to
bridge the gap created by the absence of physical union.

It should be made clear that the abstinence does not imply a withdrawal
of love or affection, but is due to specific reasons which do not affect
the fundamental bond between the couple.

In conclusion, abstinence within marriage requires careful handling,
based on mutual understanding, respect, and agreement.

Physiological needs for rest must be respected. Psychological or
spiritual needs for withdrawal should be understood and discussed.

Abstinence as a means of contraception is generally unsatisfactory and
fraught with difficulties.

Prolonged or enforced abstinence can be harmful to the relationship.

Open communication, mutual consideration, and the maintenance of
tenderness are essential during any period of abstinence.

By approaching this delicate issue with wisdom and love, married couples
can navigate periods of abstinence without damaging their harmony or
happiness.




CHAPTER IX

Children

The coming of children profoundly affects the relationship between husband
and wife.

It can be a source of immense joy, shared love, and deeper bonding. But
it can also introduce new challenges, strains, and possibilities of
misunderstanding.

_The Desire for Children._

Ideally, children should be desired and welcomed by both parents.

The decision to have a child should be a conscious and mutual one, based
on love, readiness, and a willingness to accept the responsibilities
involved.

Children who are born unwanted, or as the result of accidental conception,
start life with a handicap. They may unconsciously sense the lack of
welcome, and this can affect their emotional development.

Moreover, an unplanned or unwanted pregnancy can cause distress and
resentment between the parents, potentially damaging their relationship.

Therefore, knowledge and responsible use of birth control methods are
essential, so that couples can choose when to have children, and can
ensure that every child is a wanted child.

_Pregnancy._

The period of pregnancy requires special understanding and consideration
from the husband.

The woman's body is undergoing profound changes. She may experience
physical discomforts, fatigue, emotional fluctuations, or changes in
desire.

She needs extra love, tenderness, support, and patience from her husband.

He should be understanding of her changing moods and needs. He should
share her hopes and anxieties, and show his loving interest in the coming
child.

The question of sexual intercourse during pregnancy needs careful
consideration. Medical advice varies, but generally intercourse is
considered safe during the early and middle months, provided it is gentle
and considerate.

In the later months, abstinence may be advisable, especially if there is
any history of miscarriage or premature labour.

The couple should consult their doctor and be guided by the wife's
comfort and desire.

Above all, the husband's attitude should be one of loving tenderness and
respect for his wife's condition.

_Childbirth and After._

Childbirth is a momentous event, both physically and emotionally.

The husband's presence and support during labour, if desired by the wife
and permitted by the circumstances, can be a source of great comfort and
strength to her.

After the birth, the woman needs a period of rest and recovery. She also
needs time to adjust to the demands of motherhood.

The husband's role is crucial during this period. He needs to be
patient, supportive, and helpful.

He should protect his wife from unnecessary stress or fatigue. He should
share in the care of the baby as much as possible. He should show his
continued love and appreciation for her.

Sexual intercourse should generally be avoided for several weeks after
childbirth, until the woman has fully recovered and feels ready.

Again, medical advice should be sought, and the wife's feelings should be
the primary guide.

A premature or inconsiderate resumption of intercourse can cause physical
harm or emotional distress.

_The Impact on the Couple's Relationship._

The arrival of a baby inevitably changes the dynamics of the couple's
relationship.

The wife's time and energy are now largely focused on the child. The
husband may feel neglected or relegated to second place.

The demands of childcare, broken sleep, and increased household
responsibilities can lead to fatigue and irritability in both partners.

There may be less time and opportunity for shared activities, romance, and
intimacy.

It is important for the couple to recognise these challenges and make a
conscious effort to preserve their own relationship amidst the demands of
parenthood.

They need to make time for each other, to communicate openly about their
feelings and needs, to share the burdens as well as the joys of
child-rearing.

The husband needs to understand that his wife's absorption in the baby is
natural and necessary, but he also needs her continued love and
companionship.

The wife needs to understand that her husband still needs her attention
and affection, and that their relationship as lovers is the foundation
upon which the family rests.

They should make opportunities for shared leisure, for romantic gestures,
for intimate conversation, even if it requires planning and effort.

Maintaining the strength and happiness of their own bond is not selfish;
it is essential for their own well-being and for the security and
happiness of their children.

_Shared Parenthood._

Parenthood should be a shared adventure, not solely the responsibility of
the mother.

The father has a vital role to play in the child's upbringing, not just
as a provider, but as an active participant in care, play, and guidance.

Sharing the tasks and joys of parenthood can bring the couple closer
together.

It allows the father to develop a deep bond with his child, and relieves
some of the burden from the mother.

It provides the child with the benefit of both parents' love and
influence.

Couples who approach parenthood as a partnership, supporting each other
and sharing the responsibilities, find that it enriches their own
relationship as well as their family life.

In conclusion, the coming of children brings both joys and challenges to
a marriage.

Responsible family planning, mutual understanding during pregnancy and
after childbirth, conscious effort to maintain the couple's own
relationship, and shared parenthood are all essential for navigating this
new phase successfully.

When handled with wisdom and love, parenthood can deepen the bond
between husband and wife, and bring a new dimension of fulfilment to
their life together.




CHAPTER X

Society

Marriage does not exist in a vacuum. The relationship between husband
and wife is constantly influenced by the society in which they live.

Social customs, laws, economic conditions, public opinion, and the
attitudes of friends and relatives all play a part in shaping the
marriage.

_Social Customs and Conventions._

Every society has its own customs and conventions regarding marriage,
the roles of husband and wife, and acceptable behaviour.

These customs can sometimes be helpful, providing a framework and
support for the marriage. But they can also be restrictive or harmful if
they conflict with the couple's individual needs or values.

For example, social conventions about the division of labour in the home,
the wife's economic dependence, or the expected social life of a married
couple may not suit every partnership.

Couples need the courage to question conventional expectations and to
shape their marriage according to their own principles and preferences,
rather than blindly conforming to social pressure.

This requires mutual agreement and support between the partners.

_Laws Relating to Marriage._

The laws of the land define the legal status of marriage, the rights and
obligations of husband and wife, grounds for divorce, etc.

These laws provide a necessary framework, but they may not always reflect
the highest ideals of marriage.

Historically, laws have often treated women as subordinate to their
husbands, limiting their property rights, personal freedom, and legal
status.

While much progress has been made towards legal equality, remnants of
these outdated concepts may still persist.

Furthermore, laws relating to divorce can sometimes make it difficult or
painful to end a marriage which has irretrievably broken down, forcing
couples to remain legally bound in unhappiness.

Ideally, the law should support the concept of marriage as an equal
partnership, protect the rights of both individuals, and provide for the
humane dissolution of marriages which have failed, while safeguarding
the interests of any children involved.

Couples should be aware of the legal aspects of their marriage, but their
relationship should be based on love and mutual agreement, not merely on
legal compulsion.

_Economic Factors._

Economic conditions can have a profound impact on marriage.

Financial worries, unemployment, inadequate housing, or the strain of
overwork can create stress and tension within the relationship.

The economic dependence of the wife upon the husband, which is still
common, can create an unequal power dynamic and limit the wife's freedom
and self-respect.

Ideally, both partners should have the opportunity for economic
independence, or their financial arrangements should be based on a sense
of partnership and mutual contribution, whether through paid employment
or work in the home.

Financial matters should be discussed openly and managed jointly, based
on shared goals and mutual trust.

_Public Opinion._

Public opinion, expressed through the media, social circles, and general
attitudes, exerts a powerful influence on marriage.

It shapes expectations about romance, sexuality, gender roles, and marital
success.

Sometimes public opinion can be supportive, but often it is based on
superficiality, prejudice, or unrealistic ideals.

Couples need to develop their own standards and values, based on their
love and mutual understanding, and not be unduly swayed by the shifting
tides of public opinion.

They need the courage to be true to themselves and to each other, even if
it means going against the grain of social expectations.

_Friends and Relatives._

The attitudes and behaviour of friends and relatives can also affect the
marriage.

Supportive and understanding friends and family can be a great asset.
But intrusive, critical, or demanding relatives can create friction and
stress.

The couple needs to establish clear boundaries, maintaining their loyalty
to each other while managing their relationships with the wider family
circle.

They should present a united front and protect their own relationship
from undue external interference.

_Creating a Private World._

While marriage exists within society, it is also essential for the couple
to create their own private world, a sanctuary based on their unique
bond.

This private world is built on shared love, intimacy, trust, mutual
support, and shared values.

It is a space where they can be truly themselves, communicate openly, and
find refuge from the pressures of the outside world.

Nurturing this private world is crucial for the strength and happiness of
the marriage.

It requires conscious effort to prioritise their relationship, to spend
quality time together, to maintain intimacy and romance, and to support
each other through life's challenges.

In conclusion, marriage is inevitably influenced by the surrounding
society. Couples need to be aware of these influences--customs, laws,
economics, public opinion, family pressures--and navigate them wisely.

They need the courage to challenge harmful conventions, the wisdom to
manage external relationships, and the commitment to build their own
private world based on love, trust, and mutual values.

By doing so, they can create a marriage which is not only happy and
fulfilling for themselves, but also a source of strength and inspiration
in the wider society.




CHAPTER XI

The Glorious Unfolding

Marriage, when based on true love and mutual understanding, is not a
static state, but a dynamic process of growth and unfolding.

It is a journey undertaken together, a shared adventure in which both
partners can develop their potential and deepen their connection.

The physical union, when approached with knowledge, tenderness, and art,
becomes more than just a source of pleasure. It becomes a sacrament of
love, a means of profound communication and renewal, strengthening the
bond between the couple on all levels--physical, emotional, and
spiritual.

The challenges of life, when faced together with courage and mutual
support, can forge the relationship into something stronger and more
resilient.

The shared joys--of companionship, of achievement, of parenthood--enrich
their lives and deepen their appreciation of each other.

Through the intimacy of daily life together, the partners come to know
each other more deeply than is possible in any other relationship. They
learn each other's strengths and weaknesses, hopes and fears, joys and
sorrows.

This deep knowledge, when combined with love and acceptance, creates a
bond of unparalleled trust and security.

Marriage provides a unique opportunity for personal growth. Living in
close relationship with another person inevitably challenges our
egoism, demands patience and compromise, and encourages the development
of qualities like empathy, generosity, and forgiveness.

Each partner can help the other to grow, offering support, encouragement,
and constructive feedback.

As the years pass, the love between the couple can mature and deepen. The
first passionate intensity may mellow, but it can be replaced by a quiet,
steady flame of devotion, companionship, and profound mutual respect.

They build a shared history, a treasure-house of memories, experiences,
and understanding which binds them together in a unique and precious way.

This process of growth and unfolding is not automatic. It requires
conscious effort, commitment, and a willingness to learn and adapt.

It requires ongoing communication, honesty, and the courage to face
difficulties together.

It requires the constant nurturing of love, tenderness, romance, and
mutual appreciation.

But for those who are willing to make the effort, marriage offers the
possibility of a relationship which grows richer, deeper, and more
fulfilling with time.

It offers the chance to experience the full flowering of love, not just
as a fleeting passion, but as an enduring power which transforms and
ennobles life.

This is the glorious unfolding which is the true potential of married
love.

It is a goal worth striving for, a prize worth winning.

It requires knowledge, wisdom, patience, and unwavering commitment.

But it leads to the deepest happiness and fulfilment that human life can
offer.




Additions to Sixth Edition

Since the first publication of "Married Love," the response from readers
has been overwhelming. Thousands of letters have poured in from all
parts of the world, expressing gratitude, seeking further advice, and
sharing personal experiences.

This response has confirmed the urgent need for such a book, and has
encouraged me to add a few further points in this new edition, based on
the questions and difficulties most frequently raised by correspondents.

_The Importance of the "Honeymoon."

The term "honeymoon" often suggests a period of idyllic bliss, but in
reality, the first few weeks of marriage can be a time of considerable
stress and adjustment, especially in the physical relationship.

Many correspondents have described the disappointment and even trauma
resulting from ignorance or inconsiderateness during this crucial period.

I wish to reiterate, with even greater emphasis, the vital importance of
tenderness, patience, and knowledge during the honeymoon.

The husband, in particular, bears a great responsibility here. His
approach should be gentle, gradual, and supremely considerate of his
bride's feelings and possible fears or inhibitions.

Roughness, haste, or insistence can inflict physical or psychological
wounds which may take years to heal, if they ever do.

The aim should not be immediate consummation at all costs, but the
gradual and tender initiation into the joys of physical love, ensuring
that the bride's first experiences are associated with pleasure, trust,
and romance, not with pain, fear, or disillusionment.

A wise and loving husband will prioritise his wife's happiness and
well-being above his own immediate desires during this critical time.

_The Wife's Response._

Many women have written expressing difficulty in achieving full response
or climax during intercourse.

This is a common problem, often stemming from factors discussed earlier,
such as inadequate foreplay, lack of knowledge on the husband's part, or
the wife's own inhibitions or anxieties.

It is important for women to understand that the capacity for full
response is natural, but may need time and the right conditions to
develop.

Patience, relaxation, open communication with the husband, and sometimes
specific techniques (which are beyond the scope of this book but can be
found in more detailed manuals) can help.

It is also crucial that the husband understands the importance of his
wife's satisfaction and makes it his aim to achieve mutual climax.

_Birth Control._

The question of birth control is intimately linked with married
happiness.

Fear of unwanted pregnancy is one of the greatest destroyers of joy and
spontaneity in the physical relationship.

Responsible parenthood requires the conscious regulation of conception.

Since the first edition of this book, I have published a companion volume,
"Wise Parenthood," which deals specifically with the methods of birth
control.

I urge all married couples, and those contemplating marriage, to obtain
reliable information on this subject and to choose a method which is safe,
acceptable to both partners, and allows them to express their love
freely without constant anxiety.

_Seeking Help._

Some couples face difficulties in their relationship which they cannot
resolve on their own.

These may be physical, psychological, or emotional problems.

In such cases, it is wise to seek professional help.

A sympathetic and knowledgeable doctor, psychologist, marriage guidance
counsellor, or spiritual advisor may be able to offer valuable insights
and practical assistance.

There should be no shame in seeking such help. It is a sign of wisdom and
commitment to the marriage to address problems constructively rather than
letting them fester.

_The Enduring Power of Love._

Finally, I wish to reaffirm my profound belief in the enduring power of
love.

Knowledge and technique are important, but they are secondary to the
spirit of love, tenderness, mutual respect, and unwavering commitment.

Where this spirit prevails, difficulties can be overcome, adjustments can
be made, and happiness can be achieved and sustained.

Marriage is not always easy. It demands effort, patience, and
selflessness.

But for those who approach it with love in their hearts and wisdom in
their minds, it offers the richest and most rewarding of all human
experiences.




Appendix

_List of Books for Further Reading._

(Note: This list includes books available at the time of the 6th Edition,
1919. Many more resources are available today.)

Ellis, Havelock. "Studies in the Psychology of Sex." (Multiple volumes)
-- A comprehensive and scientific exploration of human sexuality.

Forel, August. "The Sexual Question." -- A sociological and ethical
study.

Key, Ellen. "Love and Marriage." -- A discussion of marriage from a
feminist and reformist perspective.

Carpenter, Edward. "Love's Coming-of-Age." -- Essays on the relations of
the sexes.

Stopes, Marie C. "Wise Parenthood." -- A practical guide to birth
control.

Gallichan, Walter M. "The Psychology of Marriage." -- A helpful guide
for married couples.

Meisel-Hess, Grete. "The Sexual Crisis." -- A discussion of modern
problems in sex and marriage.

_Note on Clinics._

Since the publication of "Married Love," the author has been instrumental
in founding clinics where poor mothers can obtain practical advice on
birth control and marital difficulties. Information about these clinics
can be obtained by writing to the author.

(Author's address may have been provided here in the original, but is
omitted for privacy in this digital version.)




*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MARRIED LOVE: A NEW CONTRIBUTION TO THE SOLUTION OF SEX DIFFICULTIES ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works, so
the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States
without permission and without paying copyright royalties. Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect
the PROJECT GUTENBERG™ concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is
a registered trademark, and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks,
unless you receive specific permission. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use
this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works,
reports, performances and research. They may be modified and printed and
given away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with
EBooks not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to
the trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE
THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work (or
any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™ electronic
work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to and accept
all the terms of this license and intellectual property (trademark/copyright)
agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all the terms of this
agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy all copies of
Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your possession. If you paid a
fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project Gutenberg™ electronic
work and you do not agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement,
you may obtain a refund from the person or entity to whom you paid the
fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be used
on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who agree
to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few things that
included in the Project Gutenberg™ collection may be copyrighted even
when the entire work is in the public domain in the United States. For
example, the preface of a work may be protected by copyright while the
underlying work is in the public domain. If there is any doubt about
whether a work is protected by copyright law, talk to a lawyer or check
the copyright status in your country.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States. If an
individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the United States and
there are no copyright marks, notices or other indications of copyright
applied to the work, you may copy and distribute it in the United States
without permission and without paying copyright royalties. Special
rules, set forth below, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works in other countries.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg™ License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is derived
from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not contain a
copyright notice), then you may copy and distribute it in the United
States using trademark attribution, notice and disclaimer provisions
under paragraph 1.E.1 above. If the work is derived from the
U.S. Copyright Office records, the work may be protected by a U.S.
copyright in which case the phrase "Project Gutenberg" must be removed.
Works published in the U.S. between 1929 and 1963 may be protected even
without a copyright notice, if copyright was renewed.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form. Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg™
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works provided
that
- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
 the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
 you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
 to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
 designated The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation as the
 recipient of royalty payments. Your donation to the Project
 Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, Inc. may be tax deductible.
 Follow the instructions posted on the Foundation's website at
 www.gutenberg.org/donate for paying royalties related to Project
 Gutenberg works.

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
 you in writing (or by email) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
 does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™ License.
 You must require such a user to return or destroy all copies of the
 works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue all use of and
 all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™ works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
 money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
 electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
 receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
 distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg™
work or any other work associated with the phrase "Project Gutenberg"
for commercial purposes, you must obtain permission for use of the
trademark "Project Gutenberg" via licensing fees. Licensing fees are
included in paragraph 1.E.8. Other conditions and restrictions may
apply. For additional information about commercial distribution contact
the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address
provided in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, defective or damaged disk or other medium, computer
viruses, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by your
equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund. If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunity to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law. The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.



